--- page 1 ---
   
 
Appendix XX 
High Conservation Value Forest –  
North Vancouver Island 

--- page 2 ---
 
  
 
 
 
High Conservation Value Forests 
 
North Vancouver Island Region 
 
 
July 2000 
 
 
 
Appendix Documents have not been included.   
Refer to www.westernforest.com for complete Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 1.1 

--- page 3 ---
 
WFP HCV Forest Report  i 
Version 1.1 – July 2000 
Table of Contents 
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... ... 1 
2.0 HCV FORESTS CONSULTATION ....................................................................................... 2 
2.1 HISTORICAL CONSULTATION ................................................................................................... 3  
2.2 PRESENT AND FUTURE CONSULTATION ................................................................................... 3  
3.0 HCV FORESTS ATTRIBUTE ASSESSMENT...................................................................... 4 
3.1 HCV F ORESTS DEFINED......................................................................................................... 4 
3.2 F OREST AREAS CONTAINING GLOBALLY, REGIONALLY OR NATIONALLY SIGNIFICANT… ................ 4 
3.3 F OREST AREAS THAT CONTAIN RARE, THREATENED OR ENDANGERED ECOSYSTEMS… ............... 5 
3.4 F OREST AREAS THAT PROVIDE BASIC SERVICES OF NATURE IN CRITICAL SITUATIONS…............... 6 
3.5 F OREST AREAS FUNDAMENTAL TO THE NEEDS OF COMMUNITIES AND CULTURAL IDENTITY… ....... 7 
4.0 HCV FORESTS MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES.................................................................. 8 
5.0 HCV FORESTS ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT....................................................................... 9 
6.0 HCV FORESTS MONITORING .......................................................................................... 10 
 

--- page 4 ---
 
WFP HCV Forest Report  1 
Version 1.1 – July 2000 
 
4.0 Introduction 
The Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certification assessment of Western Forest Products’ 
operations within the North Vancouver Island Region (NVIR) will include consideration of 
Principle 9 —Maintenance of High Conservation Value Forests. 
Principle 9 was revised in January 1999 by the membership of the FSC. Which adopted 
language developed by the Principle 9 Working Group at Chetumal, Mexico in September 
1998. The revisions addressed concerns expressed by forest managers, certifiers, 
conservation groups and other forest stakeholders regarding the ecological, economic and 
social complexity associated with natural forest management. 
Principle 9 requires that forest areas being considered for certification be assessed to 
determine the presence of High Conservation Value (HCV) Forest (HCVF) attributes. If these 
attributes are present, the forest manager must demonstrate they are being maintained or 
enhanced. The principle requires that: “Decisions regarding high conservation value forests 
shall always be considered in the context of a precautionary approach23.” 
Principle 9 also requires that: “The consultative portion of the certification process must place 
emphasis on the identified conservation attributes, and options for the maintenance thereof.”24 
The May 1999 first draft FSC standard for British Columbia further elaborates on this 
requirement: “(9.2.a) Where HCV Forests are identified, the management planning process 
and the certification process are required to ensure adequate participation and/or review by: 
all parties directly affected by any changes to the identified high conservation values, 
appropriate technical authorities with specialties in the identified high conservation values, 
and/or local advocate groups with interests in the identified high conservation values.”  
Principle 9 further requires that management plans “include…specific measures that ensure 
the maintenance and/or enhancement of the applicable conservation attributes,”
25 and that 
“Annual monitoring shall be conducted to assess the effectiveness of the measures employed 
to maintain or enhance the applicable conservation attributes.”26 
WFP’s approach to meeting the requirements of Principle 9 begins with the recognition that 
the principle focuses on the presence of attributes which may meet the FSC definition of high 
conservation value. Although not formally recognized as such, WFP has been managing for 
these attributes for many years.  The company began the process of assessment by asking 
three specialists familiar with North Vancouver Island Region to identify and recommend 
appropriate management approaches to maintain and enhance HCV Forest attributes present 
in Tree Farm Licence 6, Forest Licence A19240 and Managed Forest 61.  
Consultation with specialists, affected communities, conservation groups and government 
agencies with regard to protection of HCV Forests and other attributes has been ongoing for 
many years. 
The following report outlines the work WFP has undertaken in preparation for formal 
management of HCV Forests and reflects comments and input received during the 
consultation phase February to May 2000. 
                                               
 
23  Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration states: “In order to protect the environment, the precautionary approach shall be widely 
applied by States according to their capabilities.  Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty 
shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation. 
24 P&C 9.2 Revised January 1999 
25 P&C 9.3 Revised January 1999 
26 P&C 9.4 Revised January 1999 

--- page 5 ---
 
WFP HCV Forest Report  2 
Version 1.1 – July 2000 
5.0 HCV Forests Consultation 
WFP and its predecessor companies have been operating within the forests of NVIR since the 
turn of the century.  Over time, WFP, with the aid of many resource specialists, has developed 
a sound knowledge of the resource values and attributes in the region. This information is 
continually refined and updated to satisfy corporate requirements and meet the expectations 
of government agencies, other resource users, special interests, and the public. It forms the 
basis for all of WFP’s planning. 
Our present approach to managing HCV Forest issues is based on input gathered from the 
following: 
1. Technical experts from government, industry, academia and the consulting sector.  
Specialists in ecosystems and wildlife have developed and are refining strategies to 
identify and maintain HCV Forest attributes. 
2. Public consultation as part of the Management Plan (MP) and Forest Development 
Plan (FDP) preparation processes.  These processes provide avenues for involving a 
broad range of stakeholders, including First Nations, local communities, and 
environmental groups.  Resource professionals in the fisheries, parks and 
environment ministries are an integral part of the agency consultation process which 
is part of the MP and FDP.  
3. Strategic direction provided by the Vancouver Island Summary Land Use Plan 
(VISLUP), Vancouver Island Land Use Plan (VILUP), in addition to other plans 
developed as part of this process.  The plan evolved from extended public and special 
interest group consultations and negotiations over several years and provides 
management emphasis and identification of protected areas, as well as special 
consideration for wildlife habitat and ecosystem representation. 
4. Community groups ranging from Fish and Wildlife Associations and Salmonid 
Enhancement Groups to Community Resource Boards.  Many of our employees are 
volunteers with these groups and shape WFP’s corporate culture with local ideas and 
perspectives. 
5. Summary documents, such as this one, distributed to a range of interested parties to 
promote feedback on the criteria being used to identify HCV Forest attributes and the 
management strategies being developed to maintain and monitor those attributes. 
While the term “High Conservation Value Forest” is new, the concept behind it is not.  
Various forms of public consultation over the past two decades have effectively identified 
special areas that were the “HCV Forest” areas of their day.  Development of the HCV Forest 
concept is another step in the continuous evolution of forest resource identification and 
management. 
5.1 Historical Consultation 
For more than 30 years WFP has undertaken extensive public consultation on the 
Management Plans for Tree Farm Licence 6 and the former Block 4 portion of  Tree Farm 
Licence 25 in NVIR. To meet government consultation requirements and to ensure public 
involvement in identifying important attributes, this process required the company to undertake 
media advertising and contact a broad list of stakeholders for the TFL – the current 
stakeholder list exceeds 150 individuals and organizations and is growing. 
Since the early 1980's this consultation has also involved open houses in various North Island 
communities in which the company presented its proposed plans, objectives and other 

--- page 6 ---
 
WFP HCV Forest Report  3 
Version 1.1 – July 2000 
aspects of its operations in an interactive format. More than 12 day-long open houses 
involving in excess of 200 people have occurred since. 
These public sessions included senior staff who review, with interested public, various aspects 
of management, attributes and plans for the upcoming five years as well as reporting on the 
previous five years.  The public sessions are valuable in directing the company on its 
management of both timber and other resource issues in the TFL. 
The company views it’s Management Plans as a primary guiding document where important 
attributes such as special management zones, ecosystems, fish and wildlife habitats and 
areas of interest for recreation and tourism were discussed and input received from the public. 
Records of this input and the Management Plans are part of the confirmation that input 
received is used in the process. 
In the late 1980’s, the company also began public consultation processes for the preparation 
and approval of its annual Forest Development Plans. This process involved open houses and 
public advertising of the plans. WFP views these sessions as another important element in 
consultation with the public on HCV Forest attributes. In the ten-year period ending in 1999, a 
total of 28 open houses were held in North Island communities where 481 participants 
provided 101 written comments.  
WFP’s history of public consultation is extensive.  Resource agency personnel were closely 
consulted on Management Plans and Development Plans as early as the 1970's. These 
professional reviews were critical in focusing company attention on resource values other than 
timber with an emphasis on ecological, cultural, riparian and habitat values. The resource 
agency staff provided detailed comment and direction on company plans.  In most instances 
the Ministry of Forests District Manager requires the company to accommodate the 
recommendations of agency personnel.  
5.2 Present and Future Consultation 
An important component of the assessment of HCV Forest attributes is ensuring stakeholders 
are consulted.  They are asked to review and comment on WFP’s approach to evaluate and 
maintain HCV Forests.  WFP has built upon the experience gained in years of early 
consultation efforts to present this assessment to a diverse range of First Nations, 
independent scientists, academics, conservation groups, community groups, the public and 
various levels of governments. 
Starting in the fall of 1999, WFP began a series of local consultative meetings to discuss the 
principles of the Forest Stewardship Council.  During these meetings with local community 
groups, town councils, logging contractors and WFP employees the concepts of Principle 9 
and of HCV Forests were introduced.   
In November 1999, with the help of a team of external specialists in ecology, fisheries and 
wildlife, WFP prepared a formal statement outlining the assessment process that defined and 
described the attributes of HCV Forests within NVIR according to the FSC definition.  This 
statement was circulated and a request for feedback was made to interested parties, including 
those groups previously consulted.  Additional meetings were held with First Nations, 
government regulatory agencies and the public. Circulation of the statement was further 
extended to other parties using WFP’s web site.  Comments resulting from the HCV Forests 
statement document have been used to further refine the assessment process. 
As part of WFP’s ongoing planning processes it is expected that the locations and 
characteristics of HCV Forests in NVIR will continue to be reviewed and refined by input from 
government agencies, external specialists, stakeholders, special interest groups, First Nations 
and the public. 

--- page 7 ---
 
WFP HCV Forest Report  4 
Version 1.1 – July 2000 
6.0 HCV Forests Attribute Assessment 
6.1 HCV Forests Defined 
High Conservation Value Forests are defined as those that possess one or more of the 
following attributes: 
/g216/g32Forest areas containing globally, regionally or nationally significant: 
• Concentrations of biodiversity values (e.g. endemism, endangered species, refugia); and/or 
• Large landscape level forests, contained within, or containing the management unit, where 
viable populations of most if not all naturally occurring species exist in natural patterns of 
distribution and abundance 
/g216/g32Forest areas that are in or contain, rare, threatened or endangered ecosystems 
/g216/g32Forest areas that provide basic services of nature in critical situations (e.g. watershed 
protection, erosion control) 
/g216/g32Forest areas fundamental to meeting basic needs of local communities (e.g. subsistence, 
health) and/or critical to local communities’ tradi tional cultural identity (areas of cultural, 
ecological, economic or religious significance identified in cooperation with such local 
communities). 
A framework for conducting a conservation assessment has been completed by WFP.  
Aspects of this assessment have now been completed and WFP is currently working on 
finalizing the locations of HCV Forests within the North Vancouver Island Region.  The 
following information is being utilized as indicators for identifying HCV Forest characteristics 
and location: 
6.2 Forest Areas containing globally, regionally or nationally significant… 
/g216/g32Concentration of biodiversity values (e.g. endemism, endangered species, refuga); and/or 
/g216/g32Large landscape level forests, contained within, or containing, the management unit, where 
viable populations of most if not all naturally occurring species exist in natural patterns of 
distribution and abundance. 
6.2.1 Concentration of biodiversity values 
As part of our strategy for managing forest-dependent wildlife, known sensitive species and 
their associated habitat requirements have been identified.  Of the sensitive species identified, 
two are red-listed mammals, two are red-listed birds, three are blue-listed mammals and eight 
are blue-listed birds.  In addition to red- and blue-listed species, two other mammals have 
been identified as regionally important.  Species identified in our review are included in 
Appendix II.  Note that there are many factors that have resulted in these species being 
identified as sensitive, few of which are related to forest development. 
Maintaining the distribution and abundance of known sensitive species is a major component 
of WFP’s wildlife management approach.  Strategies will continue to be refined and aid in 
identifying habitat types that are critical for sensitive species. 

--- page 8 ---
 
WFP HCV Forest Report  5 
Version 1.1 – July 2000 
There have been no recorded observations of red-listed plants in NVIR.  Two blue-listed 
plants have been collected but from non-forested or sparsely treed wetlands and are unlikely 
to occur within harvesting blocks. 
NVIR also supports numerous fish populations.  Although only one fish species, the giant 
black stickleback, is considered rare or endangered, the importance of retaining small 
anadromous spawning stocks is recognized.  Appendix III includes an assessment of fish and 
fish habitat values found in NVIR.  
Three Special Management Zones (SMZ) have been identified in the defined forest area as 
part of the Vancouver Island Land Use Plan.  This land use plan was produced through a 
multi-stakeholder, consensus-based process over a period of three years.  The intent of the 
SMZ designation is to identify land and coastal areas with regionally significant values or 
combinations of values requiring comprehensive management objectives and strategies to 
ensure compatible development.  Two zones, SMZ 2 – West Coast Nahwitti Lowlands and 
SMZ 7 – Johnstone Strait, have been designated with the primary objectives of managing for 
significant scenic and recreational values and for the maintenance of coastal wildlife habitat.  
The third, SMZ 4 – Koprino, has been established to focus on retention of a significant 
proportion of old forest, and on maintenance/enhancement of wildlife habitat associated with 
old forests. The SMZs, which are described in detail in Appendix IV, cover approximately 
23,000 hectares of NVIR.  The zoning recommendations and associated objectives in the 
VILUP are being implemented by WFP.  Critical portions of the SMZs within NVIR have been 
identified as candidates for HCV Forest. 
6.2.2 Landscape Level Forests in natural conditions 
Forest lands within the North Island have been significantly modified by Europeans for almost 
a century.  The region also experienced a “catastrophic” (versus endemic) natural disturbance 
at the turn of the century when close to 10% or 15,000 ha of the assessment area’s productive 
forests were leveled, in widely distributed patches, by hurricane-force winds.  Although these 
sites now support maturing coniferous forest, this event, in addition to occasional fire 
disturbance, produced a mottled landscape with fewer extensive, intact tracts of undisturbed 
old forest.  However this deficit of large tracts of intact old forest did not preclude fully 
functioning ecosystems and viable populations of naturally occurring species.  The past 
century of forest harvesting has continued to diversify the landscape by adding a range of 
seral stages where previously younger forests were rare or occurred sporadically.  This 
change may have reduced populations of species closely associated with late seral forests 
and favoured previously less abundant species that require shrubs and early seral habitats 
(e.g. neotropical migrant birds).  Current conservation efforts focus on maintaining late seral 
habitat and species. 
6.3 Forest areas that contain rare, threatened or endangered ecosystems… 
As part of the recent land use planning initiatives on Vancouver Island (≈3,353,000 ha.), a 
protected area strategy was completed that increased the designation of protected areas to 
439,000 ha or one-seventh of Vancouver Island.  The process sought to ensure all 
ecosystems would be well represented within this protected area system.  Local gaps in the 
ecosystem representation have been identified in NVIR and are being addressed through 
landscape level strategies. Currently, there are six Provincial Parks designated in and around 
NVIR: Cape Scott, Marble River, Misty Lake, Quatsino, Raft Cove and Brooks Peninsula.  
Details about the parks located in and around NVIR can be found in Appendix VII.  As well, 

--- page 9 ---
 
WFP HCV Forest Report  6 
Version 1.1 – July 2000 
WFP has established or donated private properties for three additional reserves for ecosystem 
maintenance: Spruce Bay Old Growth Reserve, Varney Bay Gene Pool Reserve and Cluxewe 
Salt Marsh. 
At the local level, WFP is involved in the Landscape Unit planning process that is ongoing 
throughout BC.  The intent is to ensure representation of both terrestrial ecosystems and old 
forests in each landscape unit.  Through this process each landscape unit within NVIR was 
ranked for biodiversity, timber and other resource values relative to surrounding landscapes.  
Based on this ranking, a biodiversity management emphasis (High, Intermediate or Low) was 
established for each unit to provide appropriate levels of biodiversity management.  Planning 
is currently underway to meet the desired biodiversity emphasis options.  Many of the areas 
identified during this process will be considered HCV Forest. 
WFP, as part of their inventory process, has conducted detailed terrestrial ecosystem 
classification for most of NVIR.  This classification system, in combination with information 
provided by the B.C. Conservation Data Centre has identified some rare plant communities 
potentially present in NVIR.  A review of these communities and their associated habitat 
conditions (see Appendix V) indicates that many of these communities are represented in 
existing protected areas, but those not well represented would be further captured in riparian 
forest.  An assessment of the major riparian complexes found in NVIR has been used to 
determine candidate areas for appropriate HCV Forest designation. 
Atypical substrates found in NVIR are also being considered for HCV Forest designation.  
Atypical substrates are defined as locales of special soils that support uncommon to rare 
species adapted to these special conditions.  Within NVIR exposed limestone bedrock is an 
atypical substrate.  This carbonate rock, as it weathers, releases bases (especially calcium) 
and produces less acidic soils than other bedrock types.  In spite of thin soils, nutrient cycling 
is rapid and productivity high.  Because limestone weathers by solution, these sites develop 
karst features (caves, sinkholes etc.) and a distinctive surface morphology (epikarst). These 
sites contain distinctive plant communities with uncommon herbs, ferns and bryophytes and 
have considerable recreational value for spelunkers. 
6.4 Forest areas that provide basic services of nature in critical situations… 
HCV Forests include those forests that provide ecological services in critical situations.  Within 
NVIR, drinking water supplied to communities is considered as such, and consequently both 
Calbrick Creek and Quatse River watersheds are included as HCVF.  Several other small 
creeks are under water licence and are also being used for domestic purposes.  Local 
communities including WFP employees and their families rely on these water sources.  As 
HCV Forests these watersheds will be managed for water quality and flow. 
WFP also recognizes that there are forests in NVIR that are critical for maintaining slope 
stability and preventing soil erosion.  Evaluation of terrain and soil conditions is being used to 
identify critical areas warranting HCV Forest designation.  At the landscape level, maps of 
slope stability are derived from terrain and ecosystem maps using a standard provincial, five-
class stability rating system.  At the operational planning level, terrain stability field 
assessments are undertaken in conjunction with silviculture and logging plans  (WFP was 
undertaking such assessments for more than a decade before they were required by 
government regulation).  Both of these approaches are used to identify sensitive terrain where 
retention of forest cover is required (i.e. as protection forest).  This includes virtually all 
stability class V and part of the stability class IV rated terrain types.  In addition, critical sites 
identified during the preparation of silviculture plans are incorporated into reserves within or 

--- page 10 ---
 
WFP HCV Forest Report  7 
Version 1.1 – July 2000 
on the boundary of cutblock units.  For example, this includes fragile folisol soils that overlie 
coarse, blocky colluvial deposits where regeneration could not be assured following logging   
6.5 Forest areas fundamental to the needs of communities and cultural identity… 
For many years WFP has had a working relationship with local First Nations whose territories 
cover the defined forest area (Appendix VIII). Consultation with these groups occurs during 
the preparation of Traditional Use Studies, Archeological Impact Assessments, operational 
plan reviews and through discussions that support community programs and employment 
opportunities.  Areas identified as having traditional significance or cultural concerns are 
accommodated in WFP’s planning and forestry activities.  Areas of cultural significance, with 
the agreement of First Nations, will be designated as HCV Forest. 
In addition to local First Nations communities, there are a number of communities within the 
area that rely heavily on the forest industry for employment.  WFP has been actively working 
with these communities to ensure the company’s goals coincide with those of the 
communities.  As recreation and tourism within NVIR continues to develop, WFP has worked 
toward ensuring facilities exist for public recreation.  This work has resulted in the creation and 
maintenance of twenty-three recreation sites.  These recreation sites are being considered for 
HCV Forest designation. 

--- page 11 ---
 
WFP HCV Forest Report  8 
Version 1.1 – July 2000 
7.0 HCV Forests Management Strategies 
WFP’s ecological classification system is the foundation for forest management planning and 
activities in NVIR. This work provides a solid basis for interpretation of forest ecology and 
provides guidance for developing conservation strategies.  
Currently, new Management Plans for Tree Farm Licence 6 and Managed Forest 61 are being 
prepared. Management Plans, and subsequent Landscape Unit Plans, will use WFP’s 
ecosystem classification work to relate not only timber productivity, but also to identify key 
wildlife habitats and ecosystems.  The recent development of computer modeling technology 
now allows spatial analysis of multiple resource interactions.  Using this approach, the 
conservation of biodiversity, wildlife and fish habitat, water quality, and soil stability and 
ecosystem productivity become building blocks of timber harvesting and silviculture decision-
making. 
Development of strategies to address the maintenance and/or enhancement of conservation 
attributes by identifying and protecting areas of important old forest characteristics, significant 
riparian influence and unique ecosystems is continuing.  Proposed management strategies 
will continue to be evaluated and adapted in response to new information and experience.  
On-going resource inventories will ensure our knowledge of forest and habitat conditions 
remains up-to-date.  Appendix II, IX and X outline management strategies that are being used 
to maintain HCV Forest attributes. 
In the spirit of the precautionary principle, activity planning around HCV Forest attributes will 
always be conservative, and ensure that protection of the value(s) is a high priority.  

--- page 12 ---
 
WFP HCV Forest Report  9 
Version 1.1 – July 2000 
8.0 HCV Forests Adaptive Management 
The concept of HCVF is relatively new and remains untested.  During the early period of 
implementation attribute definitions, management actions, and monitoring programs will of 
necessity be flexible.  As mistakes are made and new information becomes known through 
consultation, research, and operational experience, management strategy will be adjusted. 
Whereas some HCVF attributes are permanently fixed in space (e.g. riparian areas) other 
attributes have a temporal nature.  For example certain habitat elements may be associated 
with seral stages; hence HCVF designations would move as forest succession progresses.  
New HCVF attributes will be identified and some HCVF designations may be removed.  For 
example a community water source may be replaced with an alternative source and hence in 
future may not be designated as HCVF for watershed protection.  Should a natural 
disturbance set back an old forest reserve to an early seral state, it would be logical to move 
the HCVF designation to a more appropriate replacement area.  It is important to recognize 
that attributes define HCV and not necessarily map polygons.  Maps of HCVF are therefore 
transitory and adaptive. 
Once HCVF attributes are identified, initial strategies for managing and conserving these 
attributes will be decided upon and form the basis of management and operational plans. 
As implementation proceeds, adaptive management will be needed to ensure that a rigorous 
and systematic approach to adjusting HCVF management strategies is followed. 
Some adaptive management strategies will be passive: for example where there is insufficient 
HCVF area for a well-replicated test or where extra precaution is warranted. 
In most cases however a range of options needs to be looked at and evaluated in a formal or 
active manner such that comparisons of the outcomes of alternate options are meaningful.   
This will involve careful planning, experimental design, indicator monitoring, and data analysis 
to steer future management, in an iterative fashion, toward desired future forest conditions.  
Desired future forest conditions are also changing with changing social values and new 
scientific knowledge, further necessitating adaptive management strategies.   
 

--- page 13 ---
 
WFP HCV Forest Report  10 
Version 1.1 – July 2000 
9.0 HCV Forests Monitoring 
Due to WFP’s history in the area, information regarding forest cover can be traced back 
decades using aerial photos, original land survey notes, original forest inventory maps and 
timber cruise drawings and information.  In the late 1980’s WFP began maintaining this 
inventory information in a Geographical Information System (GIS), which now allows for 
comparisons of past and present forest cover conditions.  As additional resource inventories, 
such as ecosystem classification, have been collected, refined or updated, they too have been 
captured within the GIS.  This amalgamation of inventory information into a common system 
enables detailed analysis and monitoring of past, present and future resource conditions. 
Annual reports document past forestry activities for much of the defined forest area including 
items pertinent to this criterion: 
/g216/g32public involvement 
/g216/g32management and utilization of timber resources 
/g216/g32protection and conservation measures 
/g216/g32forest health management 
/g216/g32silviculture 
/g216/g32research 
Other methods that may be useful for monitoring conservation attributes include the use of 
government statistics for the area: 
/g216/g32escapement records of salmon (DFO/WFP program) 
/g216/g32salmon harvest records (DFO program) 
/g216/g32hunting and trapping records (Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks, Wildlife 
Branch) 
/g216/g32flora and fauna occurrence records (Royal British Columbia Museum) 
WFP continues to consult with external experts to help shape monitoring and adaptive 
management systems to ensure high conservation characteristics are maintained or 
enhanced in the long term.  Identification of appropriate indicators and methodologies for 
monitoring has begun as part of WFP’s conservation strategy.  As part of planning 
commitments, WFP will continue to advocate and participate in research projects and refine 
resource inventories.  Appendix IX and Appendix XII outline some adaptive management and 
monitoring methods that will be used to ensure HCV Forest attributes are being managed to 
ensure their maintenance over time. 
 

--- page 14 ---
 
 
Appendix XXI 
High Conservation Value Forest Attribute 
Management Strategy  
 
 
 
 
 

--- page 15 ---
 
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 1 
Draft 4.0 
November 2000 
High Conservation Value Forests Attribute  
Management Strategies 
1.0 Purpose 
In 1998 Western Forest Products Limited (WFP) applied for Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) 
certification of 233,000 hectares within its North Vancouver Island Region (NVIR).  The FSC 
certification scheme is based on 10 international Principles and Criteria. By applying for FSC 
Certification WFP has committed to conducting its operations in compliance with all the Principles 
and Criteria of FSC.   
Principle 9, Maintenance of High Conservation Value Forests states that “Management activities 
in high conservation value forests shall maintain or enhance the attributes which define such forests.  
Decisions regarding high conservation value forests shall always be considered in the context of a 
precautionary approach”.   
Of the Criteria associated with Principle 9, Criteria 9.3 is related to the specific management of High 
Conservation Value Forest (HCVF) attributes.   In January 2000, WFP developed a report entitled 
“High Conservation Value Forests North Vancouver Island Region”. Using the FSC’s definition and 
based on the company’s experience operating in NVIR, the report was developed to determine the 
presence of HCVF attributes, particularly those inadequately covered by existing programs and 
policies, within WFP’s forest tenures.  It also suggested potential management strategies.  This 
report was revised in August 2000 incorporating the feedback that was received during a 
consultation process with stakeholders and First Nations, and forms the basis for moving ahead with 
formal management of HCVF. 
Management of HCVF focuses on the precautionary maintenance or enhancement of attributes such 
as significant concentrations of biodiversity, ecosystems at risk, watersheds, unstable terrain, or 
fundamental economic or cultural needs of local communities or First Nations.  
This document elaborates on the management strategies that will be used to maintain or enhance 
HCVF attributes that have been identified within WFP’s North Vancouver Island Region through 
several decades of public and stakeholder participation and consultation processes. 
2.0 High Conservation Value Forests Defined 
High Conservation Value Forests are defined as those that possess one or more of the following 
attributes: 
/g216/g32Forest areas containing globally, regionally or nationally significant: 
• Concentrations of biodiversity values (e.g. endemism, endangered species, refugia); 
and/or 
• Large landscape level forests, contained within, or containing the management unit, 
where viable populations of most if not all naturally occurring species exist in natural 
patterns of distribution and abundance 
/g216/g32Forest areas that are in or contain, rare, threatened or endangered ecosystems 
/g216/g32Forest areas that provide basic services of nature in critical situations (e.g. watershed 
protection, erosion control) 
/g216/g32Forest areas fundamental to meeting basic needs of local communities (e.g. subsistence, 
health) and/or critical to local communities’ traditional cultural identity (areas of cultural, 
ecological, economic or religious significance identified in cooperation with such local 
communities). 

--- page 16 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 2 
2.1 Concentration of biodiversity values 
2.1.1 Wildlife 
As part of our strategy for managing forest-dependent wildlife, known sensitive 
species and their associated habitat requirements have been identified (Table 1). 
There are many factors that have resulted in these species being identified as 
sensitive, few of which are forest development related including the lack of adequate 
inventory information.   
Table 1 – Red, blue listed and regionally important Mammals and Birds 
Red-listed Species 1 Habitat 
Pacific water shrew Riparian areas and wetlands 
Keen’s long-eared myotsis Caves and nearby old growth 
Northern goshawk laingi Low to mid elevation mature to 
old growth stands (nesting) 
Marbled Murrelet Old growth with large branches 
greater than 15cm in diameter
 
Blue-listed Species 2 Habitat 
Ermine Riparian areas with dense 
understory
 
Vancouver Island Wolverine High elevation stand types 
Roosevelt Elk Low elevation old growth 
(winter) and young second 
growth
 
Great blue heron Deciduous stand types, 
wetlands and estuaries
 
Peregrine falcon pealei Rocky ledges with overhanging 
vegetation (nesting) 
White-tailed ptarmigan Generalist, uses a range of 
seral stages 
Western screech owl Low elevation riparian areas 
(nesting) 
Northern pygmy owl Low elevation, late seral stage 
stand types (nesting) 
Huttin’s vireo Low elevation, late seral stage 
stand types (nesting) 
Sandhill crane Wetlands, estuaries 
Regionally Important 
Species 
Habitat 
Black bear Generalist, uses a range of 
seral stages 
Black-tail deer Generalist, uses a range of 
seral stages 
1 – Red Listed Species are species that are considered endangered or threatened in BC and 
generally has less than 20 occurrences in the province.  It may have more if BC represents much of 
the remaining world population, if the population trend is precipitously down, or if the threats to 
remaining populations is serious. 
2 – Blue Listed Species are species that are  considered vulnerable in BC and generally has 
between 21 and 100 occurrences in the province.  
Maintaining the distribution and abundance of known sensitive species is a major 
component of WFP’s wildlife management approach.  Strategies will continue to be 
refined and aid in identifying habitat types that are critical for sensitive species.  

--- page 17 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 3 
2.1.2 Plants 
There have been no recorded observations of red-listed plants in NVIR.  Two blue-
listed plants have been collected, but from non-forested or sparsely treed wetlands 
and are unlikely to occur within harvesting blocks. 
2.1.3 Fish 
NVIR supports numerous fish populations within the watersheds and streams found 
there.  Although only one fish species, the giant black stickleback, is considered rare 
or endangered, the importance of retaining small anadromous spawning stocks is 
recognized.  The Misty Lake Ecological Reserve was established to protect the giant 
black stickleback. 
2.1.4 Special Management Zones 
Three Special Management Zones (SMZ) have been identified in the defined forest 
area as part of the Vancouver Island Land Use Plan (VILUP).  VILUP was developed 
from a thorough multi party consultation process in the mid 1990’s.  The SMZs, which 
are described in detail in WFP’s High Conservation Value Forests North Vancouver 
Island Region document, cover approximately 23,000 hectares of NVIR.  The intent of 
the SMZ designation is to identify land and coastal areas with regionally significant 
values or combinations of values requiring comprehensive management objectives 
and strategies to ensure compatible development.   
2.1.4.1 West Coast Nahwitti Lowlands  SMZ 
The West Coast Nahwitti Lowlands Special Management Zone is located on 
the outer west-coast of northern Vancouver Island immediately south of Cape 
Scott.  The primary values of this SMZ are: maintenance of scenic values, as 
visible from coastal areas and access routes; protection of cultural/heritage 
(archaeological) values; protection of sensitive coastal fish and wildlife 
habitats, and maintenance of recreation values and opportunities. 
2.1.4.2 Koprino SMZ 
The Koprino Special Management Zone is located along the west coast of 
northern Vancouver Island.  More specifically it is situated at the southern tip 
of the West Coast Nahwitti Lowlands SMZ and runs to Koprino Harbour and 
across to Jules Bay on Holberg Inlet.  The primary values associated with this 
SMZ are the protection of old growth biodiversity and connectivity functions, 
and the protection of upland wildlife habitat. 
2.1.4.3 Johnstone Strait SMZ 
The Johnstone Strait Special Management Zone is located on the east coast 
of Vancouver Island immediately south of Bauza Cove and north of the Tsitika 
Protected Area.  The primary values associated with this SMZ are: the 
maintenance of scenic values, as visible from coastal areas; the maintenance 
of old growth biodiversity values; the maintenance of coastal wildlife habitats; 
and the maintenance of shoreline recreation opportunities. 

--- page 18 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 4 
2.2 Large Landscape Level Forests 
The forests of NVIR have undergone significant alteration over the past century as a result of 
both human and catastrophic events. Therefore there are no large unaltered landscape level 
forests located within NVIR tenures.  However, there are several protected areas adjacent to 
NVIR tenures that do contain large intact landscape level forests.  Over 70,000 hectares are 
contained within Cape Scott Provincial Park and Brooks Peninsula Provincial Park.  These 
two areas provide for the full range of biological attributes. 
2.3 Forest areas that are in or contain, rare, threatened or endangered ecosystems  
WFP, as part of their inventory process, has conducted detailed terrestrial ecosystem 
classification for most of NVIR.  This classification system, in combination with information 
provided by the BC Conservation Data Centre has identified some rare plant communities 
potentially present in NVIR (Table 2).  A review of these communities and their associated 
habitat conditions indicates that most of these communities are well represented in existing 
protected areas.  Those not well represented (CWHvm1 07 & CWHvm1 09) may be present 
in North Island riparian forests.  
Atypical substrates found in NVIR are also being considered for HCVF designation.  Atypical 
substrates are defined as locales of special soils that support uncommon to rare species 
adapted to these special conditions.  Within NVIR exposed limestone bedrock is an atypical 
substrate. Because limestone weathers by solution, these sites develop karst features 
(caves, sinkholes etc.) and a distinctive surface morphology (epikarst). These sites may 
contain distinctive plant communities characterized by uncommon herbs, ferns and 
bryophytes and have underground features, where present, are of considerable recreational 
value for spelunkers. 
Table 2 – Red and Blue Listed Ecosystems Potentially in NVIR 
PLANT 
COMMUNITY 
BEC UNIT PROV. 
RANK1 
PROV
. LIST 
DISTRIBUTION  
VERY WET HYPERMARITIME CWH 
Picea sitchensis / 
Maianthemum 
dilatatum 
CWHvh1/08 S2      RED   Limited to higher terraces on 
larger rivers.   
Alnus rubra / 
Maianthemum 
dilatatum 
CWHvh1/10 S3      BLUE Early seral community limited to 
active floodplains of larger rivers; 
somewhat similar to WFP’s S4 
ecosystem. 
Picea sitchensis / 
Gaultheria shallon 
CWHvh1/14 S3      BLUE Very limited extent.  Dry, rocky, 
coastal headlands within 100-200 
metres of the coast. 
Picea sitchensis / 
Kindbergia oregana 
CWHvh1/15 S2S3    BLUE Very limited extent on old, raised 
beaches in close proximity to 
present-day sand/shingle 
beaches.  
Picea sitchensis / 
Malus fusca 
CWHvh1/19 S2S3    BLUE Very limited extent bordering small 
minerotrophic (fen) wetlands 
(S11ecosystems) on fluvial 
terraces.   

--- page 19 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 5 
PLANT 
COMMUNITY 
BEC UNIT PROV. 
RANK1 
PROV
. LIST 
DISTRIBUTION  
VERY WET MARITIME CWH 
Tsuga heterophylla - 
Pinus contorta / 
Cladina rangiferina 
CWHvm1/0
2 
S2S3    BLUE Very limited extent on very thin-
soiled rock outcrops, usually in 
close proximity to the east coast 
and inner coast of Quatsino 
Sound, and on small offshore 
islands.  Not operable.  This 
includes WFP’s S2P ecosystem. 
Tsuga heterophylla - 
Thuja plicata / 
Gaultheria shallon   
CWHvm1/0
3 
 
S2S3    BLUE Widespread but generally not 
extensive ecosystem of rocky 
outcrop sites with virtually 
continuous Folisol soils.  Partly 
operable because of low volume 
and only when closely associated 
with adjacent better sites/stands.   
Thuja plicata – 
Tsuga heterophylla / 
Polystichum 
munitum 
CWHvm1/0
4  
S3?  BLUE Limited to relatively well-drained 
colluvial, limestone and raised 
beach sites (inner, not outer 
coast), in places with some 
Douglas fir.  This includes WFP’s 
mapped S3B, S12F and only a 
minor component (est.5%) of 
mapped S13  
Abies amabilis – 
Thuja plicata / 
Rubus   spectabilis 
CWHvm1/0
7 
S3      BLUE On moist, rich sites of high fluvial 
terraces, fluvial fans, gullies and 
seepage sites; best expressed on 
high terraces of larger rivers (but 
on older surfaces and older soils 
than CWHvm1/08). 
Picea sitchensis / 
Rubus spectabilis 
CWHvm1/0
9 
S2      RED   A later seral alluvial site on higher 
terraces of major rivers; included 
with WFP’s S3 ecosystem on Fp 
and Ft terrain types.   
Tsuga heterophylla - 
Thuja plicata / 
Gaultheria shallon   
CWHvm2/0
3  
S2S3    BLUE Widespread but generally not 
extensive ecosystem of rocky 
outcrop sites with Folisol soils.    
1 S2 - Imperiled 
Imperiled provincially because such communities with old-growth or primary forest are extremely rare or because of some 
factor(s) making them especially vulnerable to disturbance. 
S3 – Rare or Uncommon 
Provincially rare or uncommon in an old-growth / primary forest condition and susceptible to disturbance.  
 
2.4 Forest areas fundamental to meeting basic needs of local communities 
Local communities depend on the forests to meet several basic needs.  The long-term 
viability of communities is dependent in part on the supply of good quality water and 
conducting forest operations in a sensitive manner that respects site sensitivity and stability.  
2.4.1 Water Supplies 
HCVF include those forests that provide ecological services in critical situations.  
Within NVIR, drinking water supplied to communities is considered as such, and 
consequently both Calbick Creek and Quatse Lake watersheds are included as 
HCVF.  Several other creeks are under water licence and are also being used for 
domestic purposes.  Local communities including WFP employees and their families 

--- page 20 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 6 
rely on these water sources.  As HCVF these watersheds will be managed for water 
quality and flow.  
2.4.2 Slope Stability 
WFP also recognizes that there are forests in NVIR that are critical for maintaining 
slope stability and preventing soil erosion.  Evaluation of terrain and soil conditions is 
being used to identify critical areas warranting HCVF designation.  Landscape and 
stand level assessments are completed to identify sensitive terrain where retention of 
forest cover is required (i.e. as protection forest).   
2.5 Forest critical to local communities’ traditional cultural identity 
Over several decades of consultation, local communities have identified the forests of 
NVIR as having important cultural, religious, ecological, economic, and recreational 
values. 
2.5.1 Cultural and Religious 
For many years WFP has had a working relationship with local First Nations whose 
territories cover the defined forest area. Consultation with these groups occurs during 
the preparation of Traditional Use Studies, Archeological Impact Assessments, 
operational plan reviews and through discussions that support community programs 
and employment opportunities.  Areas and individual features identified as having 
traditional significance or cultural concerns are accommodated in WFP’s planning and 
forestry activities.  Areas of cultural significance, with the agreement of First Nations, 
will be designated as HCVF. 
2.5.2 Ecological 
The forests of NVIR are of significant ecological importance to local communities.  
The ecological health of the forests is directly related to the health and sustainability 
of the communities. 
2.5.3 Economic  
There are a number of communities within the area that rely heavily on the forests of 
NVIR for employment and their economic stability.  Non-timber forest products are 
locally important and important sites may be designated HCVF.  WFP actively works 
with these communities to ensure the company’s goals coincide with those of the 
communities.  
 
2.5.4 Recreation  
As recreation and tourism within NVIR continues to develop, WFP has worked 
towards ensuring facilities exist for public recreation.  This work has resulted in the 
creation and maintenance of twenty-three recreation sites.  These recreation sites are 
designated HCVF.  
 

--- page 21 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 7 
3.0 Attributes 
Management of High Conservation Value Forests is based on providing for and managing for 
specific attributes.  During initial implementation attribute definitions will be subject to ongoing review 
and revision.  As new information becomes known through consultation, research, and operational 
experience, attributes and their management strategy will be adjusted accordingly. 
 
Whereas some HCVF attributes are permanently fixed spatially (e.g. riparian areas) other attributes 
are of a temporal nature.  For example certain habitat elements may be associated with seral stages 
(e.g. traditional mushroom and berry picking areas, ungulate forage areas, etc); hence HCVF 
designations would move as forest succession progresses.  New HCVF attributes will be identified 
and some HCVF designations may be removed.  For example a community water source may be 
replaced with an alternative source and hence in future may not be designated as HCVF for 
watershed protection.  Should a natural disturbance set back an old forest reserve to an early seral 
state, it would be logical to move the HCVF designation to a more appropriate replacement area.  It 
is important to recognize that attributes define HCVF and not necessarily map polygons.  Maps of 
HCVF are therefore transitory and adaptive. 
 
 
4.0 Management Strategies 
Once HCVF attributes are identified, initial strategies for managing and conserving these attributes 
are required and will form the basis of management and operational plans.  Management strategies 
will vary in approach depending on the type of attribute they are designed to provide.  For some 
attributes the strategy will be developed to manage individual features (CMTs, bear dens, nest trees, 
etc.) while for others a strategy is required for an area (hydroriparian ecosystems, community 
watersheds, etc.).  It is important to recognize that while management strategies and initial targets 
may be set for specific attributes, they will change over time as more consultation, research, and 
operational experience takes place. 
4.1 Wildlife 
Consultant Laurie Kremsater developed “A Strategy for Managing Wildlife” in North 
Vancouver Island Region in 1999.  The wildlife strategy focuses on maintaining terrestrial 
forest dependent organisms across the tenure.  Three tactics have been developed to 
accomplish this.   
/g216/g32Maintaining the amount, distribution and heterogeneity of habitat and landscape elements 
important for biodiversity over time. 
/g216/g32Ensuring representation of ecologically distinct habitat types across NVIR, to maintain 
lesser known species and ecological functions. 
/g216/g32Maintaining the distribution and abundance of known sensitive species in NVIR. 
 
The first two tactics will combine to form a coarse filter, which should provide for the majority 
of species whose needs are relatively unknown.  While maintaining a range of suitable 
habitats across the landscape will provide for the majority of the species, the final tactic will 
form a fine filter to provide for those species who’s needs are relatively known and are not 
provided for under the coarse filter.  The fine filter would provide for species on the provincial 
red and blue lists or species identified in the Identified Wildlife Management Strategy as 
regionally important that warrant special consideration.  Particular attention will be given to 
old growth dependent species.   

--- page 22 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 8 
4.1.1 Habitat of Sensitive Terrestrial Vertebrates 
Providing habitat for sensitive terrestrial vertebrates is based on using coarse and fine 
filters at the landscape and stand levels.  
4.1.2 Coarse Filter – Landscape Level 
4.1.2.1 Old Forest 
As Kremsater points out in “A Strategy for Managing Wildlife” old forest 
structure is an important source of biodiversity and many of its attributes can 
only be developed with age.  Therefore, it is important to retain some areas of 
old forest over time.  WFP will maintain areas of old forest across the 
landscape in a variety of patch sizes.   
Strategy: Through the completion of Landscape Unit (LU) Planning Old 
Growth Management Areas will be designated as long-term reserves and 
HCVF. 
Target: At least 13% of the forested landbase in each LU will be designated as 
long-term reserves as Old Growth Management Areas (OGMA).  These 
OGMAs will either be, or will be managed to become (by implementing a 
recruitment strategy for older second growth stands), old forests.  
4.1.2.2 Forest Interior 
Within “A Strategy for Managing Wildlife” Kremsater has outlined several 
points regarding edge and forest interior condition.  As stated in the strategy 
although much of the information suggests that edge effects are not dramatic 
WFP will monitor on a precautionary approach to ensure those species not 
researched yet are provided for.  
Strategy:  During the designation of OGMAs several large areas within each 
LU will be designated. 
Target: Within each LU there will be at least 10 OGMAs greater than 50 ha in 
size and over 200m wide.  Of those OGMAs at least 4 will be over 100 ha and 
600 m wide. 
4.1.2.3 Patch Size 
Some species benefit by the proximity of different habitat types for cover, 
forage, and breeding.  Whereas, others may be negatively affected by 
microclimatic changes, predation effects, or loss of connectivity.  For many 
species edge is likely unimportant. WFP will maintain areas of different seral 
stages across the landscape in a variety of patch sizes.  
Strategy:  During the designation of OGMAs several large areas will be 
designated.  During forest development planning block size must be varied to 
increase the variability of patch sizes.   
Target: Within each LU there will be at least 10 OGMAs greater than 50 ha in 
size and over 200m wide and 10 OGMAs below 25 ha in size.  
4.1.3 Coarse Filter – Stand Level 
4.1.3.1 Old Forest 
While providing old forest at the landscape level will provide for the majority of 
species, some species with a smaller range will require some stand level 
structure.  Stand level structure will also contribute to the biodiversity of the 
area. 

--- page 23 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 9 
Strategy:  In addition to landscape level reserves stand level reserves must be 
incorporated into the planning of forest operations. 
Target: The following targets will be used to ensure stand level old forest 
reserves relative to the completion of LU plans. 
 
Table 3: Stand Level Reserve Targets 
Landscape Unit BEC Subzone After LU Plans 
(% of Area) 
San Josef CWH vh 6 
 CWH vm 10 
 MH mm 1 
Holberg CWH vh 10 
 CWH vm 12 
 MH mm 6 
Marble CWH vm 10 
 MH mm 1 
Mahatta CWH vh 10 
 CWH vm 12 
 MH mm 0 
Neroutsos CWH vm 10 
 MH mm 1 
Keogh CWH vm 12 
 MH mm 4 
Nahwitti CWH vh 10 
 CWH vm 4 
Bonanza CWH vm 11 
 MH mm 7 
4.1.3.2 Coarse Woody Debris 
Coarse woody debris (CWD) is an important stand level attribute as it is 
important for several species.  
Strategy: CWD will be maintained throughout harvested stands by managing 
to current utilization standards.  Where protection and reforestation 
commitments can be met, piles less than 50 m
2 in size will be left for CWD.  
Where hazardous snags are required to be felled from reserves, they will be 
left on site as CWD.  
Target:  >10 m3 /hectare average across harvested block 
4.1.3.3 Snags 
Snags are an important attribute for the maintenance of several species and 
as a source of future CWD.  However, snags can also be a serious safety 
hazard for forest workers.  Therefore, it is important to maintain safe snags 
throughout the forested landscape. 
Strategy: During block layout, areas of significant snag concentrations will be 
included within stand level reserves. To reduce the area of reserve edge and 
thus reduce the number of snags felled for safety reasons, layout will favour 
relatively larger reserves over multiple small dispersed patches where many 
more snags may have to be removed.  Snags adjacent to harvest areas will be 
assessed to determine their safety.  Safe snags will be maintained.  Stand 
level reserves will be designed of a sufficient size to maintain snags at the 
stand level. 

--- page 24 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 10 
Target:  
Size Landscape 
(Snags/ha) 
Percent of 
landscape 
Stand/Block 
(Snags/ha) 
15% 15 
25% 10 
70% 4 
dbh >30cm 5 
30% 2 
12% 30 
25% 15 
85% 8 
dbh <30cm 15 
15% 3 
   
4.1.3.4 Riparian Forest 
A Strategy for Managing Wildlife identifies riparian forest as a key attribute for 
the maintenance of several species. 
Strategy: Riparian zones will be managed in compliance with the Forest 
Practices Code and Private Forest Landowners Regulations.  Where 
applicable, restoration programs will be investigated to determine the 
likelihood of success and appropriate methods to achieve target levels of 
unaltered or restored hydroriparian forests.  
Target: 500 ha of unaltered or restored hydroriparian forests.  
4.1.4 Fine Filters 
The majority of the species identified within Table 1 will be provided for using the 
coarse level filters.  However, in addition to the coarse filters some fine filters may be 
required for specific species.   
4.1.4.1 Pacific Water Shrew 
This species is dependent on a narrow riparian zone along fast flowing 
streams and the margins along wetlands. 
Strategy: The coarse level filter should provide for this species. 
Target: A target is not applicable. 
4.1.4.2 Keen’s Long Eared Myotis 
Very little is known about the habitat needs of this species.  The fine filters that 
will be used to provide some of the attributes likely required by this species 
are based on providing suitable roosting sites. 
Strategy: Caves identified during harvest planning will be closely examined to 
determine whether they are used by this species.  Caves found to contain this 
species will have a reserve zone established around them and be designated 
HCVF. Snags and hollow trees are also thought to be used by this bat to 
roost. 
Target: A target is not applicable for the fine filter, as the management is 
dependent on the presence of the species.  The coarse level filters for snags 
and old forest conditions are addressed under their respective sections. 

--- page 25 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 11 
4.1.4.3 Northern Goshawk 
The majority of the management for this species is covered within the coarse 
filter.  Species specific management will focus on activities adjacent to known 
nests.  
Strategy: Cooperation will continue with the Ministry of Environment Lands 
and Parks (MOELP) on the completion of goshawk inventory programs. In 
consultation with MOELP, design management zones and operational 
constraints adjacent to nests. 
Target: Additional consultation with MOELP is required to set targets. 
4.1.4.4 Marbled Murrelets  
Habitat quality will be determined using a habitat model refined in 1998/99.  
Specific management for marbled murrelets is focussed on providing nesting 
habitat. This will be done by providing some large landscape level reserves in 
areas with moderate to high marbled murrelet habitat. 
Strategy: Incorporate marbled murrelet habitat model results into the 
designation of OGMAs.  Within each LU design several large reserves in 
areas of moderate to high murrelet habitat.  Where these areas do not exist in 
an old forest prepare a recruitment plan to address this. 
Target: In each LU with Marbled Murrelets identified as a key value, establish 
at least 2 OGMAs over 200 ha in size, with moderate to high habitat suitability. 
4.1.4.5 Ermine 
The requirements for this species are related to providing CWD in riparian 
areas of managed stands. 
Strategy: Manage CWD and riparian areas in accordance to Section 4.1.3.2 & 
4.1.3.4 respectively. 
Target: As per Section 4.1.3.2 & 4.1.3.4  
4.1.4.6 Vancouver Island Wolverine 
The Vancouver Island wolverine has not been sited for several decades within 
the forests of NVIR.  However, if any breeding occurrences are located within 
NVIR then the following strategy will be implemented. 
Strategy: Reserves will be evaluated and developed as required through the 
consultation with MOELP. 
Target: All recognized wolverine dens will be protected.  
4.1.4.7 Roosevelt Elk 
Roosevelt elk are present within NVIR in Stranby, Victoria Lake, and 
Waukwaas areas.  A model has been developed to evaluate potential habitat 
suitability.  The results of this modeling exercise will be used in the LU 
planning process.  Some key winter ranges have been identified in 
consultation with MOELP. 
Strategy: Encourage the Ministry of Forests and MOELP to finalize elk winter 
ranges for the Forest Licence.  During LU planning use the results of the 
habitat modeling to identify key reserves in the known elk use areas.  
Cooperate with MOELP on limiting the opportunities for poaching. 
Target:  Identify key elk habitat areas in Marble, Nahwitti, and Keogh LUs with 
elk habitat as a key attribute during LU planning.  Maintain VL300 gate to limit 

--- page 26 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 12 
poaching. 
4.1.4.8 Great Blue Heron 
Great blue herons are commonly seen within NVIR.  However, no known 
nests have been located in NVIR.  Management surrounding this species will 
focus on providing nesting sites. 
Strategy: In consultation with MOELP, design site specific management 
around nesting colonies as they are discovered. 
Target: Dependent on location of nesting colonies. 
4.1.4.9 Peregrine Falcon 
Peregrine falcons have been seen in NVIR, although no known nesting sites 
have been located.  However, management will be based on protection of nest 
sites as they are identified.  
Strategy: During forest management activities, if nests are discovered buffers 
will be designed around the sites and operational constraints will be developed 
as required in consultation with MOELP.  Stand level reserves will also 
incorporate rocky ledges into Wildlife Tree Patches where possible. 
Target: 100 % of discovered nests will be protected.  
4.1.4.10 White-tailed Ptarmigan 
Management for the White-tailed Ptarmigan will be based on breeding habitat.  
No known breeding areas are located in NVIR. 
Strategy: As breeding areas are discovered management zones will be 
designed adjacent to the areas. 
Target: Not applicable, dependant on location of breeding habitat. 
4.1.4.11 Western Screech Owl 
Cavity nest sites and riparian areas appear to be important attributes for the 
Western Screech Owl.  Coarse level filters should provide these attributes. 
Strategy: As per sections 4.1.3.3 and 4.1.3.4 for snags and riparian forest.  
Also within areas of riparian ecosystem restoration establish screech owl 
nesting boxes to increase the immediate availability of suitable nesting sites. 
Target: As per applicable sections.   
4.1.4.12 Northern Pygmy Owl 
Little is known about the specific needs of this species.  Although, the bird 
does appear to use old woodpecker holes for nesting. 
Strategy: Coarse level filters should be sufficient for this species.  Sufficient 
habitat should be provided through managing for snags as per Section 4.1.3.3. 
Target: As per section 4.1.3.3 
4.1.4.13 Huttins Vireo 
It is unclear why this species is listed, as it appears to use a variety of 
habitats. 
Strategy: Coarse level filters are sufficient.  Kremsater indicates no specific 
management is required. 
Target: Not applicable 

--- page 27 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 13 
4.1.4.14 Sandhill Crane 
This species is associated with wetlands and estuaries for breeding areas.   
Strategy: A 10 metre reserve will be established on all classified wetlands.  
Significant non-classified wetlands will receive a management zone where 
some trees will be retained.  Estuaries will receive site specific management 
prescriptions appropriate to their size and biological significance.  
Prescriptions will be developed in consultation with MOELP.  Access will be 
limited during breeding season when requested by MOELP. 
Target:  Not applicable as they are dependent on presence of wetlands and 
estuaries. 
4.1.4.15 Black Bears  
Black bears are a regionally important species within NVIR.  They are 
common throughout the area.  Management is based on the retention of 
denning sites for the bears.  Sites normally used by the bears include large 
hollow trees, windfalls and stumps. 
Strategy: Bear dens discovered during the planning phases of forest 
management will be incorporated into group or single tree reserves.  Where 
cutting of the tree is unavoidable the tree will be high stumped and roofed 
where possible and required.  Future den sites will be provided for in the 
development of landscape and stand level reserves.  Results of habitat 
modeling will be used during LU planning.  Training for the identification of 
bear dens will be conducted. 
Target: Maintain stand and landscape level reserves as per Sections 4.1.2.1. 
and 4.1.3.1. 
4.1.4.16 Black Tailed Deer 
Black tailed deer are a regionally important species within NVIR.  They are 
common throughout the area.  Management is based on providing suitable 
winter habitat for the species. 
Strategy: Deer Winter Ranges (DWR) have been identified within NVIR.  
Some of the DWRs have been classified as Ungulate Winter Ranges (UWR) 
under the Forest Practices Code.  Where this has not taken place the DWR 
will be evaluated during the LU planning process to determine whether there 
are other more suitable sites for deer. 
Target: Approximately the same area of DWR will be retained as long term 
reserves within the LU planning process. 
4.1.4.17 Bald Eagle and Osprey 
Although the Bald Eagle and Osprey have not been designated as either red 
or blue listed or a regionally significant species they are an important part of 
the wildlife within NVIR.  Management will focus on the presence of nests and 
management surrounding the nests.  WFP has maintained an inventory of 
raptor nests since late the 1980’s.  This inventory undergoes a regular review 
and updating. 
Strategy: Nests of both species will be protected in either stand or landscape 
level reserves.  Adequate flyaway zones and perch trees will be provided for in 
these reserves.  Operational timing constraints will be developed depending 
on the use of the nest tree during proposed operations.  Fecundity and use 
surveys will be carried out on a regular basis.  Training for the identification of 

--- page 28 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 14 
nests will take place.  
Target: Protect 100% of known and discovered nest sites.  
4.2 Fish Habitat 
The management for fish habitat revolves around the maintenance of: stream integrity and 
channel condition; providing future sources of large woody debris; moderating stream flow; 
maintaining clean water; the degree of fish presence.  Riparian Reserve zones and hydro 
riparian ecosystems will be considered HCVF.  
4.2.1 Stream Integrity and Channel Condition 
Stream integrity and channel condition are important attributes for fish habitat they will 
be managed though the incorporation of specific riparian management strategies.   
Strategy: The implementation of riparian management strategies is imperative to the 
maintenance of stream integrity and channel condition.   Forest Practices Code will be 
followed on all Tree Farm Licence and Forest Licence land.  Managed Forest land will 
be managed to Private Forest Landowners Regulations at a minimum.  
Target: Targets will be assessed on an individual basis, as they are stream specific. 
4.2.2 Large Woody Debris Inputs  
To maintain long-term productivity and structure within fish streams there must be a 
continual supply of Large Woody Debris (LWD).  LWD supplies a stream with wood that 
creates debris jams and deflects water to create habitat for fish.  The requirement of 
LWD for a stream is dependent on the energy of the stream.  The higher the stream 
energy (flow speed and volume), the greater the requirement for LWD.  Low energy 
streams require less or smaller LWD, as the erosion power of these streams is not 
sufficient to significantly alter fish habitat.  However, in higher energy streams only 
larger woody debris is stable and creates shelter, resting areas and suitable spawning 
sites for fish.  Long-term supply of LWD may be of concern for larger streams that have 
been harvested to both edges.  With diminished sources of LWD the fish habitat within 
a stream will likely decline until second growth is sizeable unless a shorter term 
recruitment strategy is in place. 
Strategy: Maintain a supply of LWD within the riparian areas of streams.  Amount of 
LWD will be dependent on the size and energy of the stream.  On fish bearing streams 
over 3.0 metres in width that have been harvested to the bank on both sides, evaluate 
future LWD sources and where required develop a recruitment strategy to provide 
future LWD. 
Target: Complete stream evaluations and develop strategies by 2005. 
4.2.3 Moderate Flow 
Forest harvesting can have impacts on the hydrological balance of watersheds.  One of 
the potential impacts is an increase in peak stream flows.  Thus increasing the potential 
for runoff related erosion. 
Strategy: In order to monitor and evaluate the potential hydrological impacts of 
harvesting within a watershed, Coastal Watershed Assessments will be carried out and 
updated on a regular basis.   
Target: The equivalent clearcut area (the area that has been clearcut with a reduction 
factor to account for the hydrologic recovery due to forest regeneration) shall not 
exceed 30% without the advice of a qualified professional. 

--- page 29 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 15 
4.2.4 Clean Water 
Fish are dependent on a constant supply of clean well-oxygenated water.   Without 
proper care during forest harvesting this attribute can be compromised by an increase 
in siltation.  The deactivation of high risk road systems is also of primary importance in 
the reduction of siltation. 
Strategy:  Harvest activities will utilize low impact systems to minimize any harvesting 
induced siltation.  During road construction siltation reduction methods (hay bails, filter 
fabric, timely seeding of exposed sites, etc.) will be used during the construction of 
stream crossings likely to impact fish habitat.  Natural drainage patterns will be 
maintained.  The identified high risk watersheds within NVIR have been evaluated for 
their potential risk to increase siltation and damage to fish habitat.  On a priority basis 
the deactivation of all high risk road systems will be completed in an orderly fashion to 
ensure the greatest risks are dealt with first.  Forest management activities will use 
specific procedures to minimize the likelihood of petroleum products or chemicals from 
entering into water. 
Target: A specific target is not applicable as the goal is for all water to remain clean.  
Sediment control will be used on all streams likely to impact fish habitat.  Complete the 
deactivation of all identified high risk road systems in NVIR by 2004. 
4.2.5 Fish Presence 
The presence of fish within a stream is an important attribute for the development of 
management strategies.  The presence of fish is determined by using intensive stream 
surveys. 
Strategy: Maintain or increase current populations of native fish species within all 
streams in NVIR. Continue salmonid enhancement activities at Marble River, Cordy 
Creek and Colonial Creek Hatcheries until populations are fully recovered as 
determined by Department of Fisheries and Oceans. Target: Population targets will be 
developed in conjunction with Department of Fisheries and Oceans and Ministry of 
Environment, Lands and Parks.  Target release levels for the salmon enhancement 
facilities is 750,000 fry annually.  
4.2.6 Fish Habitat Restoration 
WFP is active in the restoration of fish habitat within NVIR.  Restoration activities are 
completed based on overview and site specific prescriptions.  These restoration 
activities have created a substantial amount of spawning, rearing, and over wintering 
sites for important salmon and steelhead species.  
Strategy: Continue participating in fish habitat restoration programs. Secure funding to 
complete the required fish habitat restoration works for NVIR watersheds.  Complete 
fish habitat restoration identified and prioritized through the overview fish habitat 
assessments. 
Target:  Complete overview fish habitat assessments for identified priority watersheds 
by 2002.  Complete identified fish habitat restoration activities within priority watersheds 
by 2004. 

--- page 30 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 16 
4.3 Special Management Zones 
Three Special Management Zones (SMZ) are located within NVIR.  These zones are West 
Coast Nahwitti, Koprino, and Johnstone Strait.  Each of these SMZs has a specific set of 
primary values associated to the areas. 
4.3.1 West Coast Nahwitti Lowlands 
The primary values of this SMZ are the maintenance of scenic values; protection of 
cultural/heritage (archaeological) values; protection of sensitive coastal fish and wildlife 
habitats, and maintenance of recreation values and opportunities. 
4.3.1.1 Visuals 
The maintenance of visual quality within the SMZ is very important.  A 
proportion of the SMZ can be seen from the water. 
Strategy: Scenic attributes will be provided for through a comprehensive 
analysis of proposed harvest blocks.  Visual Impact Assessments will be 
carried out for blocks that are visible within the “Scenic Area”.  Proposed 
blocks that are visible from designated travel corridors will be designed to 
ensure that they meet the Visual Quality Objectives for the area. 
Target: Targets will be set on an individual basis, based on the block location 
within the Landscape Unit. 
 
4.3.1.2 Cultural/Heritage 
Due to the coastal location of the SMZ the presence of cultural/heritage sites 
are common.  In the majority of the cases the features and sites are related to 
First Nations traditional use within the area. 
Strategy: Archaeological assessments will be carried out in areas that have a 
moderate to high likelihood of containing cultural features.  Upon discovery of 
these attributes, management strategies will be developed in consultation with 
the particular First Nations involved.  Not all features will be mapped to protect 
the confidentiality of the features. 
Target: Not applicable as features are dependent on presence. 
4.3.1.3 Coastal Fish and Wildlife Habitat 
Coastal fish and wildlife habitat is an important attribute of the West Coast 
Nahwitti Lowlands SMZ. In 1995 WFP proposed to establish a coastal 
recreation, biodiversity, and wildlife reserve along coast from Grant Bay to 
Cape Scott Park.  This corridor would vary in width from 50 to 400 meters.  
However, no formal response has been received from government on this 
issue. 
Strategy: A comprehensive set of reserves and retention areas will be 
designed during the Landscape Unit planning process.  Specific species 
management will be carried out as per Section 4.1.  WFP will voluntarily 
pursue the Coastal corridor proposal as HCVF beyond legislative 
requirements. 
Target: As per Section 4.1. 
4.3.1.4 Coastal Recreation 
The west coast of the island provides some excellent recreation opportunities 
for visitors of all skill levels.  WFP has identified two areas within the SMZ as 
having very high recreation potential and thus would be designated as HCVF. 

--- page 31 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 17 
They are located adjacent to Grant Bay and Topknot Beach.  WFP has also 
developed several other recreation sites within the SMZ including Palmerston 
Recreation Area, Hecht Beach Trail, and Raft Cove Access Trail.  There are 
two provincial parks located within and adjacent to the SMZ.  WFP roads are 
the primary access to all of these recreation sites and parks.  As discussed 
above a coastal reserve was proposed in 1995 with no formal response. 
Strategy: Continue maintenance programs on existing WFP recreation sites.  
Continue road maintenance programs accessing recreation areas and parks.  
As road developments reach new features, develop other sites in consultation 
with Ministry of Forests and local communities.  WFP will further pursue the 
coastal reserve proposal. 
Target: Maintain the existing WFP recreation sites and evaluate upgrading 
and expansion of Grant Bay and Topknot Beach. 
4.3.2 Koprino 
The primary values associated with this SMZ are the protection of old growth 
biodiversity, and the protection of upland wildlife habitat. 
4.3.2.1 Old Forest 
The overall management directive for the Koprino SMZ is to focus on the 
retention of a high proportion of old forest. 
Strategy: During LU planning large OGMAs will be located within the SMZ. 
Target: Locate approximately 750 ha of OGMAs within the SMZ. 
4.3.2.2 Upland Wildlife Habitat 
The Koprino SMZ had 2 Deer Winter Ranges located in it that were not 
designated as Ungulate Winter Ranges.  However one of the focuses of this 
SMZ remains as upland wildlife habitat.  
Strategy: Wildlife habitat will be provided for at the landscape level during the 
LU planning process.  Specific management is outlined in Sections 4.1.2, 
4.1.3, and 4.1.4.  Several large OGMAs will be located within the Koprino 
SMZ.  Placement of these OGMAs will utilize the results of modeling carried 
out to identify the quality of deer and marbled murrelet habitat.  
Target: A minimum of 3 OGMAs over 100 hectares in size will be located 
within the moderate or high deer or elk habitat identified using the model.  One 
of those areas will be at least 300 hectares in size. 
4.3.3 Johnstone Strait 
The primary values associated with this SMZ are the maintenance of scenic values; old 
growth biodiversity values; coastal wildlife habitats; and shoreline recreation 
opportunities. 
4.3.3.1 Visuals  
The Johnstone Strait SMZ is located within a very high tourist use area and 
within direct view of the community of Alert Bay.  Therefore, visuals have been 
determined to be a key attribute for this SMZ. 
Strategy: Visual values will be provided for through a comprehensive analysis 
of proposed harvest blocks.  Visual Impact Assessments will be carried out for 
blocks within the “Scenic Area”.  Proposed blocks will be designed to ensure 
that they meet the Visual Quality Objectives for the area.  

--- page 32 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 18 
Target: Targets will be set on an individual basis based on the specific 
sensitivity and the location within the Landscape Unit. 
4.3.3.2 Old Forest 
The Bonanza Landscape Unit has received a significant level of harvest 
pressure over the past number of decades.  As a result of this the retention of 
old forest within this SMZ has become an important attribute. 
Strategy: During the LU planning process the SMZ will be evaluated for the 
location of OGMAs.  Establishment of OGMAs will be targeted within the SMZ.  
Where the designation of a sufficient amount of OGMAs is not possible within 
the SMZ a recruitment strategy (in consultation with MOELP and MOF) will be 
developed to attain desired levels.   
Target: Locate at least 13% of the LU in OGMAs. 
4.3.3.3 Wildlife Habitat 
The Johnstone Strait SMZ is an important source of coastal wildlife habitat. 
The marine/foreshore interface is thought to provide important habitat for 
several wildlife species.  However little is known about the exact requirements 
of these areas. Therefore the management strategy will take a cautious 
approach within this area until further information is available on the habitat 
requirements in these type of areas. 
Strategy:  The management strategy for wildlife habitat within this area is to 
place a marine management zone along the ocean for the length of the SMZ.  
The zone width will vary depending on the wildlife habitat encountered and the 
adjacent topography.  The zone will be developed to retain structures 
important for wildlife as outlined in Section 4.1.  Harvest activity may take 
place within this area to help enhance the diversity of the zone.  
Target: A target width of 50 m will be used. 
4.3.3.4 Recreation 
The Johnstone Strait SMZ is located along the shores adjacent to several high 
use recreation areas (whale watching, kayaking, fishing, camping, etc.).  
Therefore, an important attribute within this SMZ is coastal recreation.  The 
MOF has identified recreation potential areas on Blinkhorn Peninsula and at 
Kaikash Creek.  Both of these areas are surrounded by WFP tenures but not 
located within the tenures. 
Strategy: WFP will work with the MOF on the potential of providing access to 
Blinkhorn and Kaikash Recreation Areas as proposed forest development 
approaches these areas.  As forest development approaches the shoreline 
future recreation developments will be assessed with MOF.  
Target: Not applicable. 

--- page 33 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 19 
4.4 Community Water Supply 
Communities are dependent on several streams and watersheds within NVIR for a constant 
supply of fresh clean water.  Management for these key attributes will focus on minimizing 
siltation, controlling deleterious substances, and regulating water flow water. 
4.4.1 Clean Water 
Clean water will be maintained by minimizing siltation and controlling petroleum and 
other chemical products.    
Strategy:  Siltation will be controlled through the maintenance of natural drainage 
patterns and avoiding cross-stream yarding.  Reserves and retention areas will be 
utilized on larger streams.  Overview soil sensitivity assessments will be carried out to 
help anticipate areas of potential impacts on water quality. During road construction 
siltation reduction methods (hay bails, filter fabric, timely seeding of exposed sites, 
etc.) will be used during the construction of stream crossings.  Natural drainage 
patterns will be maintained.  Standard Operating Procedures will be implemented to 
minimize the introduction of petroleum products and other chemicals within stream 
systems. 
Target:  No measurable decline in water quality due to forest management activities.  
Sediment control will be used on all stream crossings above the water intake. 
4.4.2 Water Flow Levels 
A steady supply of water is an important attribute for one of the potential impacts is an 
increase in peak stream flows.  Thus increasing the potential for runoff related 
erosion. 
Strategy: In order to monitor and evaluate the potential hydrological impacts of 
harvesting within a watershed, Coastal Watershed Assessments will be carried out 
and updated on a regular basis.   
Target: The equivalent clear-cut area shall not exceed 30% without the advice of a 
qualified professional. 
4.5 Slope Stability  
Proper management in unstable slopes is important for safety and environmental reasons.  
Management strategies related to slope stability are designed to prevent road related or 
logging induced slides from occurring, thus preventing possible injuries and siltation. The 
strategy for managing unstable slopes is based on several factors including completing 
stability assessments, and the implementation of Standard Operating Procedures.  
4.5.1 Slope Stability Assessments 
Slope stability assessments are completed at two levels, an overview level and a site-
specific assessment.  The overview assessment is conducted on a large scale to 
provide the forest manager with an indication of where stability concerns may be 
anticipated.  This has been completed for NVIR tenures.  The site-specific 
assessments are completed on an individual road or block basis to provide a detailed 
analysis of the stability of the area.   
Strategy: Based on the overview assessment and indications of slope instability 
discovered during field assessments detailed stability (geotechnical) assessments will 
be conducted.  Recommendations of the assessments will be followed to reduce the 
likelihood of slides.  HCVF will be identified depending on the nature of the 
recommendations (i.e. areas that are required to be deleted from harvest). 
Target: The target is to cause no landslides from forest management activities. 

--- page 34 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 20 
4.5.2 Standard Operating Procedures 
Employees working in the forest industry depend on proper planning, equipment, and 
procedures to minimize their risk of being injured while at work.  WFP has developed 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) to address slope stability issues.  Following 
the SOP should help reduce the likelihood of injuries and environmental damage 
related to landslides. 
Strategy: Utilize the Slope Stability - SOP for working in areas with slope stability 
concerns.  Follow rainfall shut down guidelines contained within this SOP. 
Target: The target for injuries or landslides related to forest management activities - is 
zero (0).  
4.6 Cultural Significance 
WFP’s NVIR tenures cover the traditional territories of six First Nations.  Each of the First 
Nations has differing requirements to address their concerns around the management of 
cultural sites and specific attributes.  The strategies presented are general as each specific 
occurrence will have it’s own strategy developed in conjunction with the specific First Nation 
involved.  
4.6.1 Village Sites and Burial Grounds 
Village sites and burial grounds are very sensitive areas and of great importance to all 
First Nations.   
Strategy: Although the majority of these sites are contained within Indian Reserves 
outside of NVIR tenures, if they are encountered the following approach will be taken 
(including European cemeteries). Village sites and burial grounds will be reserved 
from harvest with an appropriate sized management zone established to ensure that 
the areas are not impacted by management activities.  Specific sizes of reserves and 
management zones will be developed on a site-specific basis determined through 
consultation with the communities involved.  The identification of such areas will be 
kept confidential.  Enquiries will be directed to the First Nations.   
Target: Not applicable. 
4.6.2 Middens 
A midden is a prehistoric habitation site generally characterized by the presence of a 
large amount of shell and bone fragments. The majority of middens are found along 
riparian or marine interfaces fairly close to shore. 
Strategy: As middens are identified specific management strategies will be developed 
in consultation with the applicable First Nation.  In general terms strategies would 
involve where possible relocating harvest boundaries and relocating roads to ensure 
that the areas are not disturbed by management activities.  Where these options are 
not possible a specific plan will be developed in consultation with the First Nation and 
Archaeology Branch.   
Target: Not applicable. 
4.6.3 Culturally Modified Trees 
WFP, through the use of consulting archaeologists and First Nation members has 
been conducting surveys to locate culturally modified trees (CMTs) for several years. 
CMTs are mostly found within western red cedar types located close to the ocean, 
major rivers, or known areas of past habitation.  The presence of CMTs is a good 
indication of a First Nation’s traditional use of the area.  
Strategy: As CMTs are identified specific management strategies will be developed in 

--- page 35 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 21 
consultation with the applicable First Nation.  In general terms strategies involve 
where possible relocating harvest boundaries and relocating roads to ensure that the 
attributes are not disturbed or establishing a management zone to ensure their 
presence into the future. Where these options are not possible a specific plan will be 
developed with the First Nation in consultation with Archaeology Branch. Removal or 
alteration of CMTs may be possible depending on the relative rarity of the attribute, its 
sensitivity and the possible use for wildlife and other values. 
Target: Not applicable. 
4.7 Recreation and Tourism 
Communities depend on the forests surrounding their homes as areas of personal recreation 
and for the promotion of tourism.  The tenures of NVIR are managed to provide for these 
opportunities through specific management for: provincial and regional parks; the 
identification of key features; existing company facilities; freshwater sport fishing areas; and 
visual quality. 
4.7.1 Provincial and Regional Parks 
There are several provincial and regional parks within the vicinity of NVIR.  WFP 
roads are a main source of access for several of these parks.  WFP’s management 
strategies for these attributes focus on access and adjacent forest management. 
Strategy: WFP will maintain it’s current road network that provides access to several 
provincial and regional parks adjacent to NVIR.  Road access and a reasonable level 
of maintenance will be carried out by the company.  Consultation will take place with 
the MOELP and the Regional District on all planned forest development adjacent to 
provincial and regional parks respectively. Forest management activities will be 
developed to ensure that they do not impact on the activities of the parks. 
Target: Maintain existing park access and continue consultation. 
4.7.2 Key Features 
Key recreation features are identified through the public consultation and inventory 
processes.  Once identified, management strategies must be developed to address 
each feature where development may have impacts on the feature. 
Strategy: Complete and keep up-to-date recreation inventories for NVIR tenures.  
Where features are identified that will be impacted, develop specific strategies to 
address and minimize impacts. 
Target: Continue public consultation on key recreation features.  Develop strategies 
as forest development approaches identified features. 
4.7.3 Existing Company Funded Facilities 
WFP maintains a comprehensive recreation program within NVIR.  WFP currently 
maintains 7 overnight campgrounds with approximately 100 sites, 5 day use picnic 
areas and 6 forest trails.  WFP has established a public project account from which it 
funds the maintenance of all of these sites.  The long-term maintenance of these sites 
in a safe and clean state is of primary importance to WFP. 
4.7.3.1 Campgrounds 
Seven overnight campgrounds are located throughout the tenures of NVIR.  
The maintenance for these sites is provided by WFP 
Strategy: Continue with the maintenance programs for all existing 
campgrounds.  Continue to promote the use of these sites by the public.  
Maintain the policy of not collecting user fees for the use of these sites.  

--- page 36 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 22 
Assess the availability of funding for the development of new campgrounds as 
new unique features are encountered such as those found at Topknot Beach. 
Target: Maintain at least 60 overnight campsites within NVIR.   
4.7.3.2 Day-Use Area 
WFP has developed 5 day use areas within NVIR, which are very popular with 
local residents. 
Strategy: Continue funding the regular maintenance of the current day-use 
areas.  Assess funding availability for the expansion of the day-use areas as 
use requires and new features are discovered. 
Target: Maintain at least 20 picnic sites within NVIR.  
4.7.3.3 Trails 
The development of forest trails have served several purposes including 
providing the general public with education on forest processes, and access to 
several unique features.  Six trails have been developed thus far in NVIR to 
serve these purposes. 
Strategy: Continue maintenance on all existing forest trails based on use 
levels.  Evaluate required upgrades to the existing trail systems based on their 
use and potential environmental impacts.  Continue trail development to the 
west coast at key access points.  
Target: Maintain 6 trail systems. 
4.7.4 Sport Fishing 
Several of the major lakes and stream systems contain significant populations of 
sports fish and are used by the public to fish. 
Strategy: Riparian management strategies will be developed for each riparian feature 
with special attention given to their accessibility by sports fishers.  Several of the more 
commonly used systems have had a trail network developed by the fishers.  Access 
will be maintained to these trails. Streamside fishing trails will be retained after 
harvesting.  
Target: Maintain existing trail system. 
4.7.5 Visuals 
The development of tourism opportunities within the North Island has many times 
been linked to the scenic beauty of the area.  Local tourist operators have at times, 
expressed their concern over the visual quality of areas adjacent to their 
developments.  Landscape inventories have been completed for NVIR which 
classifies the Visual Quality Objectives, Visual Sensitivity, Visual Absorption 
Capability and the Existing Visual Condition.  Scenic areas have also been 
designated within NVIR tenures.  
Strategy: Current inventories will be reviewed for each proposed harvest area.  Visual 
Impact Assessments will be carried out for those areas that are located within a 
Scenic Area.  All harvest areas will be designed to ensure that the Visual Quality 
Objectives of the area are met.  Landscape inventories will be updated on a regular 
basis to ensure new developments are adequately addressed. 
Target: Design harvest areas to meet the Visual Quality Objectives for the landscape 
unit. 

--- page 37 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 23 
4.8 Ecosystems 
The Conservation Data Center (CDC) has identified several ecosystems that are rare or 
endangered that are likely found within NVIR.  The majority of these ecosystems are well 
represented in an unharvested state within protected areas and areas constrained from 
harvest activities.  However, the few ecosystems which are not well represented in these 
areas are associated with riparian areas that are mostly constrained from harvest.  As 
mentioned in Section 2.3 exposed limestone areas are an atypical substrate within NVIR.  
4.8.1 Riparian Ecosystems 
The CDC has identified CWHvh1-08 and CWHvm1-09 as Red listed ecosystems and 
CHWvm1-07 as a Blue listed ecosystem. All of these ecosystems are associated with 
riparian areas.  Under the Lewis Ecosystem Classification System used in NVIR, 
these ecosystems would be primarily part of larger S3 ecosystem and to a lesser 
extent the S4 and S5 ecosystems.   
Strategy: The retention of forest in Riparian Reserve Zones, Old Growth Management 
Areas, and Wildlife Tree Patches will ensure the future presence of unharvested 
riparian associated ecosystems.  A training program will be developed and 
implemented to ensure that field staff can identify these ecosystems.  In areas where 
the riparian areas have been harvested along major streams and rivers a restoration 
program will be evaluated for possible implementation based on their relative 
importance, likelihood of success, and availability of funding.  For deciduous 
dominated ecosystem (S4), alder will be the preferred species.  For conifer dominated 
ecosystems (S3 & S5), management will concentrate on producing climax conifer 
dominated stands.  
Target:  At least 13% of riparian ecosystems retained in either an unharvested state 
or scheduled for restoration. 
4.8.2 Exposed Limestone   
NVIR has a significant component of limestone that runs through the center of the 
tenures.   As discussed in Section 2.3 exposed limestone bedrock is an atypical 
substrate.  These sites contain distinctive plant communities with uncommon herbs, 
ferns and bryophytes and have considerable recreational value for spelunkers. 
Strategy: Limestone ecosystems will be maintained in a mosaic of diverse forest age 
classes.  As limestone features are discovered during forest management activities, 
site specific management strategies will be developed that are best suited to the 
feature in consultation with MOF Recreation Officer.  Strategies may include the 
establishment of retention areas around significant karst features with measures to 
improve wind firmness (topping, pruning...).  An evaluation of limestone dependent 
species will be carried out to determine their sensitivity to harvesting and occurrence 
in different seral stages.  As karst features are discovered the karst inventory will be 
updated to reflect the new information.  Road construction activities will be designed 
to avoid/minimize impact on cave and karst features.  Sediment will be controlled and 
drainage will be directed away from karst features. A training program will be 
developed and implemented to ensure that field staff can identify these features. 
Target: 450 hectares of unaltered or restored karst-limestone areas. 

--- page 38 ---
 
HCVF Attribute Management Strategies  Page 24 
4.9 Rare and Endangered Plants 
There have been two species of rare and endangered plants identified within NVIR. Both of 
these species are associated with bog or wetland ecosystem associations.  Although these 
sites are not normally associated with harvest activities a precautionary approach will be 
taken by the development of a management strategy.  
Strategy: Information circulars are in preparation (A. Inselberg) for field foresters who develop 
silviculture prescriptions; circulars will make foresters aware of the rare species and present 
habitat information and photos to facilitate their identification.  If encountered, 
logging/silviculture plan would be modified accordingly with input from an ecologist. 
Target: Not applicable. 
4.10 Economic Stability 
The forests of NVIR are a vital part of the economic stability of local North Vancouver Island 
communities.  However, no areas have been identified as HCVF for the purpose of economic 
stability, as little interest has been generated in doing this during consultation.  This is very 
likely to change in the near future, as communities become more aware of and involved in 
the designation and management of HCVF.  
5.0 Summary 
This document summarizes the current approach that will be used in managing for HCVF attributes.  
However, the development and refinement of these management strategies and targets is a 
continual process that will be refined over time through increased consultation, education, and 
experience. 
 

--- page 39 ---
 
 
Appendix XXII 
Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife

--- page 40 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 1 
Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife 
By Laurie Kremsater, R.P.F., R.P. Bio, MSc. 
Western Forest Products is developing a forest management plan for North Vancouver 
Island Region (NVIR) that can be certified as ecologically sound and socially responsible.  
Ecologically sound forestry requires that attention be given to long-term site productivity, 
water quality and flow, protection of rare ecosystems, and several other ecological indicators.  
The provision of habitat for wildlife and the persistence and productivity of key wildlife 
species are key indicators of the appropriateness of management activities.  
The wildlife strategy for NVIR focuses on means of maintaining terrestrial forest dependant 
organisms across the tenure.  Three main tactics will accomplish the goal: 
1. Maintaining the amount, distribution and heterogeneity of habitat and landscape 
elements important for biodiversity over time. 
2. Ensuring representation of ecologically distinct habitat types across NVIR, to maintain 
lesser known species and ecological functions. 
3. Maintaining the distribution and abundance of known sensitive species in NVIR. 
The first tactic, maintaining habitat attributes and landscape patterns over time is the 
emphasis of most strategies to maintain habitat for wildlife and is the emphasis of the 
Biodiversity Guidelines of the Forest Practices Code.  There are simply too many species to 
address the needs of each individually.  For those species that are unknown, or for species 
whose requirements may not tie closely to the habitat attributes and patterns addressed 
under tactic 1, the strategy also addresses representation of ecosystems (tactic 2).  Several 
species, however, need individual attention.  Some of these species are legislated by the 
Identified Wildlife Strategy, others are identified in the red and blue lists, and still others have 
been identified by local forest managers and biologists.  The third tactic will ensure that 
actions are undertaken to address needs of species that are especially vulnerable to forestry 
practices and whose habitat requirements are relatively well known. 
Tactics 1 and 2 combine into a coarse filter approach that maintains ecosystems, structures 
and habitat patterns to sustain ecosystem functions such as dispersal and migration for 
organisms whose needs are not well known or unknown.  Tactic 3 is a fine filter: managing 
for sensitive species whose habitat needs are relatively well known and who may not be 
addressed adequately by the coarse filter. 
We outline the essence of a coarse filter approach but focus much of this discussion on the 
fine filter supplement.  This is not because the fine filter is more important than the coarse 
filter.  The opposite is true.  Rather, the rationale and approaches to the coarse filter 
management have been described in detail elsewhere (Biodiversity Guidelines, CSP 1995, 
Bunnell et al. 1998a) and are general to coastal B.C.  The fine filter is more specific to NVIR. 
Tactic 1.  Maintaining the amount, distribution and heterogeneity of habitat and landscape 
elements important for biodiversity: a coarse filter. 
Stand-level coarse filter:  Particular habitat elements or landscape features are known or 
thought to contribute substantially to forest biodiversity.  At the stand level, important habitat 
elements include live trees, snags, downed wood, deciduous trees, canopy cover and 
vertical and horizontal heterogeneity, shrub cover, herb-layer cover, and forest floor depth 
and composition (Thomas 1979, Hunter 1990).  These elements are of direct importance to 
many vertebrates (Bunnell et al. 1998), and are often key factors for non-vertebrates that are 

--- page 41 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 2 
declining in managed forests (e.g., Berg et al. 1994, Frisvoll and Prestø 1997, Kaila et al. 
1997).  These attributes have been discussed at length by Bunnell et al 1998a,b, Franklin 
1988, Hunter 1990, CSP 1995).  Since most authors agree on the importance of leaving 
structure and the types of structure that need to be retained, interested readers are directed 
to those previous papers; the discussions will not be repeated here.  The attributes of 
particular importance are those associated with older stands: large live trees, dead and dying 
trees, down wood, and intact forest floor.  They are critical to provide habitat for a wide 
variety of wildlife in managed forests. 
Forest-level coarse filter:  Across forest landscapes several features are thought to be 
important to sustaining biodiversity.  The most important of these are riparian habitats, areas 
of old forest, connectivity, edges and forest interior conditions (Rochelle et al. 1999).  These 
features are more controversial than stand-level recommendations.  Some are controversial 
because their effects on wildlife are uncertain (e.g. corridors).  Others are accepted as 
important to wildlife (e.g., riparian areas), but application to forest management is unclear 
(e.g., what are appropriate protection measures?).  Because of these issues, the forest-level 
coarse filter issues are outlined in more detail than the stand–level issues.  In depth 
discussions can be found in Bunnell et al. 1998a,b; Hunter 1990, and Rochelle et al. 1999. 
Riparian habitats:  Riparian systems (waterbodies and their adjacent terrestrial 
environment) are dominant features of coastal watersheds and are important habitats for 
terrestrial and aquatic organisms.  As well, many ecosystem functions such as dispersal, 
nutrient cycling, and trophic processes that influence fish habitat, centre on the riparian 
system.  Although most vertebrates do not require riparian areas (Bunnell et al. 1998), many 
(about 70%) use these areas heavily for a variety of reasons.  Riparian areas are usually 
productive, vegetatively diverse and structurally diverse, and as such they provide a wide 
variety of resources to wildlife.  Deciduous trees and broadleaf shrubs are often abundant in 
riparian areas and account for some of the abundance of vertebrates found in riparian zones.  
These deciduous species also hold key roles in trophic pathways by providing inputs of litter 
and insects into streams to support aquatic invertebrates and vertebrates downstream.  
Some amphibians may spend as many as 5 years as larvae in small streams which are 
susceptible to changes in riparian vegetation.  Riparian zones are often thought of as 
providing travel corridors, some species are restricted to movements in riparian zones (e.g., 
mink, river otter, beaver).  There is growing evidence that many other species also move 
along streamsides.  Although the requirement of riparian areas as corridors is not completely 
clear, it is likely that they play an important role. There is no evidence that riparian protection 
need be continuous to maintain water temperature or quality or to allow riparian zones to 
function as movement corridors.  It is more important that riparian reserves follow 
topographic breaks and natural features than to force a buffer of a given width along the 
entire length of a stream. 
Riparian areas can be dramatically affected by forestry activities, particularly roadbuilding. 
The FPC provides protection to salmon-bearing streams and their adjacent habitat.  WFP is 
aware of the influences of small streams on the water quality of larger streams into which 
they feed.  Road crossings at smaller streams should be monitored to note significant 
increases in sedimentation that may influence the waters downstream.   A degree of 
protection can be accomplished through the placement of wildlife tree patches around 
headwater streams, avoidance of cross-stream yarding and retention of lesser vegetation. 
Riparian areas are gradients between aquatic and terrestrial systems; the extent of the zone 
is therefore difficult to delineate.  Narrow reserves appear to meet the objectives of 
maintaining stream integrity and water quality and may accommodate vascular plants 

--- page 42 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 3 
associated with the riparian zone, but not all birds or mammals are found in narrow buffers.  
This generality is supported by several authors (see Bunnell et al. 1998).  That said, there 
are no universally appropriate buffer widths, but FPC standards for S1, S2 and S3 streams 
seem not a bad compromise.  
As well as ensuring protection of small streams, riparian buffers should be afforded to 
wetlands and lakes even if they are less than 2 ha.  Some wetland buffers can be 
accomplished using stand-level retention.  Again there is no evidence that wetland buffers 
need be entire although it is the author’s opinion that these buffers should include the 
majority of the perimeter.  
Management questions as to how to design riparian reserves so that as much as possible 
can remain standing are being investigated.  To some extent, blow down can provide 
important inputs of down wood to the site and provide inputs of large down wood to the 
stream, but the preferred approach is to find ways to keep the majority of the buffer standing. 
Roads usually have greater impacts on riparian systems than harvesting because of 
increased sediment production and the potential for road-related slides.  The increased 
sediment production is associated with overland flow from road surfaces, particularly when 
roads are under construction or in active use; with overland flow off cutslopes and fillslopes 
prior to their revegetation, and with concentrated flows along ditchlines that result from 
collected overland flows and intercepted subsurface flows. Consequently, roads in the 
riparian area should be avoided whenever possible.  Midslope roads, when necessary, 
should be carefully engineered to allow natural flow of subsurface water.  
One red-listed mammal, the Pacific Water Shrew, found within NVIR uses riparian areas.  As 
well marbled murrelet (red listed), although not designated as a riparian associate, may well 
find nest platforms on old trees in these highly productive areas.  
Old forest:  Many attributes of old forests contribute to biodiversity.  Some are structural 
elements such as large live trees, snags and down wood that can be retained during 
harvesting and so be present in managed stands.  For example, broadleaved trees are 
sometimes found in old growth forests and can be maintained in managed stands, as can 
openings and some degree of structural heterogeneity (by thinnings and clumping of 
retention).  Not all features of old growth can be retained or created in managed stands, and 
many of these features require old age to develop.  Large trees are clearly dependent on 
age.  Rough bark that supports overwintering insects that feed bark gleaners (e.g., brown 
creeper, woodpeckers, nuthatches, chickadees) also requires age to develop.  The degree of 
rot in a tree, especially heart rot, is largely dependent on age.  Hollow logs are created only 
from hollow trees (heartrot does not persist once a tree is down), and these hollow trees are 
critical habitat as dens for black bears.  Large snags and large down wood only come from 
large trees.  Depth of litter, growth of lichens, and epiphytes such as mosses and liverworts 
also require old age to accumulate.   
Most research indicates that it is the amount of old forest habitat rather than its arrangement 
that is most important to several species (Bunnell 1999).  Both red-listed birds are dependent 
on structures of old forest.  For these red-listed vertebrates most of these structures can be 
retained in managed stands or in mixes of managed and old growth stands.  For some non-
vertebrates such as invertebrates, bryophytes, and lichens the degree of dependence on 
intact areas of old forest may be higher than for vertebrates.  For these species for which 
there is little information it is prudent to reserve some areas of intact old growth as a 
conservative approach.   

--- page 43 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 4 
Several species listed in Table 2 are of concern because of their association with old trees, 
large down wood or cavities.  These species include, but are not restricted to, merlin 
(especially the ‘black’ subspecies), bald eagle, osprey, golden eagle, wood duck, Barrow’s 
goldeneye, common merganser, pileated woodpecker and Vaux’s swift.  
Forest edge and interior:
  Forests edges can be relatively long term features formed where 
two plant communities meet, or they can be relatively short term features formed where 
successional stages within plant communities come together.  Conceptually, edges have 
environments significantly different from the interior of adjacent patches – different 
microclimate, vegetation, microclimate, and wildlife species, they are not simple linear 
features but rather regions of gradual change. 
Forest practices, especially in even-aged management, create edges.  There is tremendous 
variability in responses around edges, both for abiotic variables and biotic responses 
(Kremsater and Bunnell 1999).  Findings from studies in a non-forested matrix (most of the 
current literature) do not transfer appropriately to conditions within an area of forest stands of 
different ages.  Below is a summary of the major points regarding edge and interior from 
Kremsater and Bunnell (1999) and tentative recommendations derived from those. 
1) Microclimatic edge effects are well documented, though highly variable in western, 
coastal forests.  Microclimate changes near edges extend 1 to 3 tree heights into forests, 
depending on aspect and variable measured.  Microclimatic effects appear to increase 
structural diversity of the vegetation near edges and increase vertebrate species 
richness, primarily in response to shrubby vegetation.  Influences on invertebrates and 
insectivorous vertebrates are more direct.  Although changes of microclimate variables 
are detectable over 150 m–200 m, responses of organisms studied to date are 
concentrated within the first 50 m. 
2) There is little evidence of negative effects of edges in western coastal forests.  Evidence 
for positive edge effects is similar in all studies (species richness generally increases with 
edge and more species are positively associated with edges than are negatively 
associated with edges).  Evidence of negative edge effects differs starkly between 
eastern or mid-western North America and coastal montane forests.  In the east and 
midwest many studies document increased predation and parasitism near edges; in the 
Pacific Northwest researchers have found little effect of patch area or negative edge 
effects.  Parastism by cowbirds in western forests is largely undocumented.  Predation of 
marbled murrelet nests and songbird nests by jays and corvids has been observed 
around high-contrast edges.  No species is consistently associated with forest interior.  
Table  includes the species (e.g. brown creeper) most likely associated with forest interior 
for NVIR.  Unfortunately, studies on bryophytes and lichens are lacking and these 
species may be the most sensitive to edges and interior.  These groups should be the 
focus of further study. 
3) The largest effect appears within 50 m of the edge.  Reported edge effects range from 0 
to several hundred meters into forests.  Microclimatic effects generally extend about 1 to 
3 tree heights into the forest, but edge influences on distributions of organisms or factors 
affecting organisms (such as predation and nest parasitism) are concentrated within 50 m 
of the edge.  Effects have been reported as extending much farther, but these studies are 
usually either flawed or otherwise unconvincing (see Paton 1994 and Kremsater and 
Bunnell 1999).  Effects of disturbance from road traffic can extend farther (e.g., 400 m on 
deer and elk, particularly where roadside cover is low).  
4) The kinds of edge effects important to forest management in the Pacific Northwest are 
largely undocumented, and must be inferred.  Most studies have focused on forest to 
field edges; fewer have examined forest to clearcut edges.  All available data suggest 

--- page 44 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 5 
relatively little effect across forest age classes as compared to forest to field contrasts.  
The difference occurs simply because there is less difference in vertebrate communities 
between a clearcut and adjacent forest than between a field and adjacent wooded area.  
Also, unlike fields, clearcuts grow into taller second growth so the abrupt edge is 
transitory.  Similarly, there are no applicable data on potential edge effects in the small 
openings induced by partial cutting, or on edges between old growth and second growth 
stands.  Neither of these effects is likely to be large.  Openings may be too small in the 
first instance; in both instances the structural contrasts are relatively small.  It is these 
contrasts that appear most strongly associated with edge effects.  Data on edges induced 
by roads and most inherent edges such as streams and wetlands are sparse.  Most 
inherent edges around streams and wetlands contain a large deciduous component that 
appears to contribute to their greater vertebrate richness.  The available evidence 
suggests that as with induced forest edges, the greatest effect around streams occurs 
within the first 50 m (e.g., Darveau 1995; Kinley and Newhouse 1997).   
Although many of the above points suggest edge effects are not dramatic in western forests, 
that conclusion must be tempered.  Studies on organisms most likely affected negatively by 
edges are sparse (e.g., lichens, bryophytes, invertebrates, and amphibians).  As well, 
harvesting has a relatively recent history in western forests and edge effects may become 
more apparent with time.  Known effects of road edges do apply in western forests and 
extend a considerable distance. 
Small patches of old growth will provide habitat for many species.  Patches that are 200 
meters across will provide interior conditions for most organisms.  Where retaining late 
successional or forest interior species is a dominant objective some large areas of old 
contiguous forest (>600 m diameter) should be retained.  The value of 600 m is a 
conservative estimate that should allow for biological effects that are currently unknown. 
Connectivity:  It is clear that isolated populations undergo much higher rates of extinction 
than do those that experience immigration and emigration.  Small populations are threatened 
by several events including inbreeding depression and chance environmental catastrophes.  
In eastern parts of United States where forests are surrounded by rural and suburban areas, 
there is growing and compelling evidence that forested strips (corridors) are a useful tool to 
link populations of vertebrates.  In western forests the evidence is to the contrary.  As yet 
forests in the west are not disconnected.  Exceptions may be for large carnivores that 
typically range over large areas and are likely restricted in movement by human population 
expansion in the Okanagan valley, the Columbia River Valley and the east side of Vancouver 
Island.  Crossing early seral habitats is only a problem for a few vertebrate species for a 
short time.  Second growth does not seem to be a barrier to vertebrates. 
Corridors may be useful for creatures besides vertebrates.  But these smaller creatures may 
also benefit more from management that makes the harvested matrix more favourable.  At 
present data are insufficient to evaluate whether forested corridors or matrix management 
are more useful approaches to maintain connectivity in forested landscapes.  Landscape 
context can provide an initial guide.  If areas have been largely converted to young seral 
stages, then connections of old forest habitat should use corridors.  In areas where early 
seral habitat constitutes a small percent, and natural linkages still exist, then matrix 
management should be a priority.  Where valley bottoms have been progressively logged, 
establishing streamside buffers of old forest (letting them grow) would be useful to establish 
future connections.     

--- page 45 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 6 
Roads:  Roads have dramatic effects on wildlife.  Direct mortality of large and small 
mammals can be significant in heavily roaded areas.  Roads allow access for hunters and 
poachers.  Roads also allow disturbance by traffic and by people; disturbance is a key factor 
affecting some species.  Predation by natural predators may also concentrate along roads.  
Roads are also avenues for the transfer and spread of exotic species.  Roads can facilitate 
movement of some species and impede others.  They have been documented as barriers to 
invertebrates, small mammals, and, depending on the road size and use, to some larger 
furbearers and ungulates.  Roadside seeding can provide forage that attracts bears, 
ungulates and small mammals.   
A number of ‘listed’ species are sensitive to access.  For these species-controlling access is 
the key conservation activity.  Reducing the amount of roads and restricting the distribution of 
roads will affect poaching and hunting effort.  Although not popular with recreationists, control 
of road access to key areas is prudent for management of some wildlife species.  Forest 
practices influence the amount of road required.  In areas with concentrations of species that 
are sensitive to access and disturbance, cutblocks and harvest patterns (green up) should be 
planned to minimize road densities. 
A few species may be affected by booming ground operations:  red-throated loon, Brandt’s 
cormorant, Double-crested cormorant and Pelagic cormorant.  
Actions for tactic 1:
  For NVIR, coarse filter management strategies have been set out in 
the Biodiversity Guidebook and Riparian Management guidebook.  Direction can also be 
taken from documents written for other areas (e.g., CSP 1995; Bunnell et al. 1998a,b) 
provided that the recommendations are taken in context.  Details from these documents 
should be considered and included during landscape planning.  In general, the most 
important aspects of a coarse filter strategy for NVIR would be in order of importance 1) To 
ensure riparian protection of fish-bearing streams and ensure practices around smaller non-
fish bearing streams do not impact water quality downstream; 2) To implement access 
control in areas where poaching of elk or bear occurs; 3) To implement stand level retention 
of structures characteristic of old forests; and 4) To summarize amounts and distribution of 
old growth remaining and then designate old growth areas that encompass key habitats, help 
build connectivity and forest interior, and provide representation of major ecosystem types 
(see next section).  
Tactic 2.  Ensuring representation of ecologically distinct habitat types across Western’s 
tenure, to maintain lesser known species and ecological functions: a coarse filter. 
Whereas the needs of most species will be accommodated by management of habitat 
structures and patterns (tactic 1), and others will be managed directly (tactic 3), some 
organisms may be closely tied to particular habitat types.  Therefore, it is important that the 
range of habitat types be represented, to maintain the known or unknown species that are 
dependent on them.  Representation can be of ecosystems or of forest ages.  
“Representation” of forest ages means that the full natural range of seral stages and 
conditions should occur in an area.  However, the main concern for biodiversity monitoring is 
for late seral stages, because management generally creates abundant early and mid-seral 
forest.  
Representation of ecosystem types would ideally be based on habitat types that encompass 
the range of organisms in NVIR.  Determining those habitat types would be a difficult, 
perhaps impossible empirical question that would require extensive geographic sampling of a 
wide range of organisms.  Instead, representation should focus on ecosystems defined 

--- page 46 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 7 
according to the Biogeoclimatic Ecosystem Classification (BEC) system.  BEC zones are the 
broadest classification unit, generally differentiated by the dominant climax forest tree 
species.  Subzones within zones are distinguished by climatic differences, including 
temperature and moisture regimes.  Subzone variants contain different plant communities 
within the same subzonal climate regime.  Within variants, site series reflect different local 
soil moisture and productivity gradients.  BEC zones clearly differ in their species 
composition, and subzones or variants undoubtedly contain unique organisms.  It is less 
clear that each individual site series is distinct, but organisms do respond to the range of site 
series (e.g., organisms in xeric sites differ from those in subhydric sites).  
Action for tactic 2: Planning of representation should be at the subzone or variant level, 
with some consideration given to broad groupings of site series (i.e., xeric, mesic, and hydric) 
represented within subzones.  Some organisms have restricted ranges, so the geographic 
distribution of representative units also should be considered. 
Tactic 3.  Maintaining the distribution and abundance of known sensitive species in the main 
geographic areas of North Vancouver Island Region: a fine filter. 
In British Columbia, wildlife species on the red list27, blue list28 and those discussed in the 
Identified Wildlife Strategy require specific attention during planning of forestry activities.  Not 
all listed species inhabit NVIR; not all are affected by forestry practices; and not all are well 
enough known to allow more than cursory consideration during development of management 
plans.  As well, available funds and time do not allow all species to be studied or monitored.  
We rank the red, blue and identified wildlife species in terms of priority for research, 
monitoring and management consideration.  We also note species that may not be on any of 
those lists that may be useful foci for monitoring and management efforts.  
We list vertebrate species that inhabit NVIR and indicate the status of each of those species 
(red listed, blue listed, identified wildlife, or significant for other reasons).  For each listed 
species we discuss reasons for their listing.  We also indicate which species are affected by 
forest practices and indicate the habitat elements or habitat patterns to which they are 
sensitive.  The quality of information available differs markedly among species.  When 
possible, we indicate the quality of information available.  For those listed species affected by 
forest practices, we will indicate the priority for management consideration, research, and 
monitoring activities.  As further information on each species becomes available the ranks 
will change  -- the management priorities will need frequent updating and revisiting.  
Red- and blue-listed in NVIR and affected by forest practices. The following paragraphs 
briefly outline the habitat requirements, potential threats, and any suggested management for 
the red- and blue-listed species (in taxonomic order) and identified wildlife that are 
associated with forests in NVIR.  Table 1 summarizes the red/blue-listed and regionally 
significant species.  
                                               
 
27 Includes any indigenous species or subspecies (taxa) considered to be Extirpated, Endangered, or 
Threatened in British Columbia. Extirpated taxa no longer exist in the wild in British Columbia, but do 
occur elsewhere. Endangered taxa are facing imminent extirpation or extinction. Threatened taxa are 
likely to become endangered if limiting factors are not reversed. Red-listed taxa include those that 
have been, or are being, evaluated for these designations. B.C. Ministry of Environment 
Classification. 
28  Includes any indigenous species or subspecies (taxa) considered to be Vulnerable in British 
Columbia. Vulnerable taxa are of special concern because of characteristics that make them 
particularly sensitive to human activities or natural events. Blue-listed taxa are at risk, but are not 
Extirpated, Endangered or Threatened. 

--- page 47 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 8 
Table 1: Summary of red-listed, blue-listed, and Regionally Important Species 
Red-Listed Species 
Pacific water shrew 
Keen’s long-eared myotis 
Northern goshawk 
Marbled murrelet 
Blue-Listed Species 
Ermine anguinae 
Vancouver Island wolverine 
Roosevelt elk 
Great blue heron 
Peregrine falcon pealei 
White-tailed ptarmigan 
Western screech owl kennicottii saturatus 
Northern pygmy owl swarthy 
Huttin’s vireo 
Sandhill crane 
Regionally Important Species 
Black bear 
Black-tailed deer 
Water shrew  (Sorex palustris brooksi):  Red listed and included in Identified Wildlife 
Management Strategy (IWMS).  Not addressed by COSEWIC.  Only the brooksi subspecies, 
confined to Vancouver Island, is red listed.  The water shrew is limited to areas within a few 
metres of small fast flowing streams or along margins of wetlands.  Their habitats range from 
valley bottoms to alpine areas. Under interim measures of the IWMS, 30 m on both sides of 
stream to a maximum of 18 ha along an occupied stream reach should be included in a 
WHA.  The IWMS further specifies that WHAs along high suitability streams should include a 
30 m core area and 45 m buffer.  In the core areas there should be no roads, no recreation 
trails, and no salvage of timber.  In the buffer, harvesting should maintain 80% of the original 
stand’s basal area.  Landscape guidelines recommend maintaining riparian linkages.  
There is no information on population trends for this species, but numbers are probably 
declining due to habitat loss on eastside of Vancouver Island.  
Implications to WFP’s forest management:  Water shrew is limited in distribution to 
Vancouver Island and may be found in both southern and northern areas of the island.  The 
riparian protection suggested under the coarse filter management should suffice in providing 
habitat for this species. 
Keen’s long-eared myotis:  Red listed and included in Identified Wildlife Management 
Strategy.  Rated as vulnerable by COSEWIC.  Little information is available about the basic 
biology of the solitary Keen’s long-eared myotis.  This bat may use tree cavities in mature or 
old growth forests for roosts.  One has been found hibernating in a cave.  No information is 
available on habitat needs, let alone on useful amounts of specific attributes to maintain. 
The IWMS recommends protecting any known roost sites, protecting some old growth, and 
avoiding activity around caves that may be roost areas.  Under interim measures of the 
IWMS, 12 ha or 200 m radius around hibernaculum should be protected. 
Implications to WFP’s forest management: Keen’s long-eared myotis could inhabit NVIR.  
Sightings are so rare, and so little is known about the biology of this species, that the most 

--- page 48 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 9 
useful forest management strategies would be to buffer cave mouths, maintain a supply of 
snags and decadent trees, and protect some old growth.  Most of these activities are 
undertaken during coarse filter management.  Buffering cave mouths with a fringe of timber 
may be useful, but may be unnecessary – too little is known to assess the practice, but erring 
on the conservative side would suggest buffers be provided.  The low abundance of this 
species makes it difficult to research or to monitor. 
Ermine anguinae:  Blue listed but not included in the Identified Wildlife Management 
Strategy.  Not addressed by COSEWIC.  This mustelid dens in burrows or hollow logs.  Its 
range is restricted to Vancouver Island and Saltspring Island, although no recent records 
have been made on Saltspring.  Fewer than 20 occurrences have been documented, so no 
data on population trends are available.  These ermine have been photographed in settings 
laid for research on wolverine.  Urban expansion is reducing their habitat.  Effects of forestry 
are speculative:  harvesting may reduce woody debris to unacceptable levels and alter forest 
understories in negative ways. 
Implications to WFP forest management:  The anguinae subspecies is only found on 
Vancouver Island.  Historical records indicate ermine are present near Cape Scott, Port 
Hardy, and Quatsino (Materi et al. 1996 reported these records from Cowan and Guiget 
1965).  Cowan and Guiget (1965) also indicate records from other areas of Vancouver 
Island.  Materi et al. (1996) reported no evidence of ermine in the TFL areas of northern 
Vancouver Island from trapping records from 1989 to 1994.  The ermine’s preference for 
woody debris and thick understories near water make it prudent to keep these attributes in 
managed forests. 
Wolverine vancouverensis:  Red-listed but not included in Identified Wildlife Management 
Strategy and not addressed by COSEWIC.  The vancouverensis subspecies is found only on 
Vancouver Island.  Few sighting have been recorded since the 1970s.  This wolverine 
formerly ranged across Vancouver Island but now is restricted to inaccessible mid Island 
mountainous areas and the west coast.  Only 4 sightings have been recorded since 1980.   
Only 5 major field studies have been carried out on the wolverine in North America and none 
of these have been done in B.C. The wolverine is a solitary, wide-ranging species. Daily 
movements may exceed 30 km. They are extremely sensitive to human disturbance and 
abandon nests if disturbed.  They are also reluctant to cross roads so transportation corridors 
are barriers to movement.  The availability of prey is likely the key feature determining habitat 
preference.  Wolverine prey on large and small herbivores and rely to an extent on carrion.  
Because of their sensitivity to human disturbance they may be threatened by increasing 
recreation activities at the high elevations where breeding occurs. 
Implications to WFP forest management:  Very few records exist.  If any breeding 
occurrences are ever found in NVIR, then those areas should be protected from frequent 
high-elevation recreation activity.  Access management to provide areas free from human 
disturbance and to reduce the extent of roaded areas is the most potentially useful 
management strategy for this species.  Since prey include deer and elk, management for 
these ungulates may affect wolverine.  
Roosevelt elk:  Blue listed but not in Identified Wildlife Management Strategy.  Not 
addressed by COSEWIC.  Threats to Roosevelt elk include predation by wolves, poaching, 
and over-winter mortality.  The potential negative effects of forest management is eliminating 
winter ranges and providing access for poachers (and predators).  Elk requirements have 
been discussed at length by Nyberg and Janz (1990).  

--- page 49 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 10 
Implications to WFP forest management:  Elk herds inhabit the Victoria and Stranby 
watersheds.  A herd of up to 25 animals frequents the lower Waukwaas Creek watershed 
and some elk have been sighted in the Mahatta and Koprino watersheds at times.  Campbell 
(1995) identified extensive areas of suitable elk habitat in the Waukwaas Creek area.  
Unsuccessful efforts to radio collar elk in this area has been attempted to determine the full 
range of habitat use.  A model by Brunt is useful for identifying elk winter ranges and has 
been applied in the TFL.  Protecting winter ranges and restricting access are the two most 
important management activities for WFP to undertake.  A first step is to gather information 
on locations of elk herds. 
Great blue heron:  Blue listed but not included in Identified Wildlife Management Strategy.  
The coastal subspecies Ardea herodias fannini is designated as vulnerable by COSEWIC.  
The species is sensitive to environmental contaminants and human disturbance at colonies.  
The heron’s range overlaps with heavily populated areas of the Georgia Depression.   
During March to August activity near breeding colonies should be avoided.  Breeding usually 
occurs between early April to early June.  Colonies are usually located in cottonwood and 
alder trees so maintaining large deciduous trees is important.  Herons may move colonies in 
response to predation.  Providing a buffer of trees around colonies may be important to 
reduce predation. 
Implications to WFP forest management:  Although no breeding records are known for the 
area, nesting colonies are likely in NVIR.  
Northern goshawk laingi:  Red listed and included in the Identified Wildlife Management 
Strategy (IWMS).  Listed by COSEWIC as vulnerable.  The laingi subspecies is restricted in 
range to the Queen Charlotte Islands and Vancouver Island and breeds in low to mid 
elevation mature and old growth forests.  It is red-listed because of expected impacts of 
logging of old growth.  Models projecting population trends suggest that 40% of northern 
goshawk populations have been lost.  The model is based on the assumption that old growth 
is required as nesting habitat.  Other than the model projections, no information on 
population trends is available.   These hawks are also sensitive to human disturbance at nest 
sites.  Their prey base includes mostly birds (including blue grouse, woodpeckers, varied 
thrush) and some small mammals. 
The mainland subspecies (atricapillus) is known to use many habitats from deciduous forests 
to man-influenced habitats.  Sweden has large populations of goshawk in heavily harvested 
areas – they use buildings as nest sites and disturbance does not appear to be an issue.  
They do not frequent residential areas. 
The IWMS suggests establishing a three-tiered WHA.  The entire WHA should be 2400 ha 
and include nest areas, post fledging areas, and foraging areas.  The post fledging area 
should be 240 ha and should include six 12 ha nest areas, one of these should be an active 
nest.  The entire WHA should include as much area of large trees and >60% canopy closure 
as possible.  Roads should not be built in the 12 ha nest area.  No harvesting is allowed in 
the nest areas except to improve stand structure and that harvesting cannot be carried out 
during the breeding season (March 15 to September 1).  In the WHA, harvesting should 
retain 20% old growth in closed canopy and 40% mature forest.  The remaining 40% of the 
area should contain no more then 20% early seral conditions.  Other recommendations 
include limiting hauling to not more than 3 consecutive days between March 15 and 
September 1 and minimizing road density.  Interim measures for the IWS protect 12 ha or 
200 m radius around nest site.  

--- page 50 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 11 
Implications to WFP forest management:  Northern goshawk has been found near Cape 
Scott, the Quatse River, and Port Hardy (Materi et al. 1996).  Ministry of Environment Lands 
and Parks have additional records that may include other areas of NVIR.  A first step in 
determining how to manage for this species is to gather known nest locations for the area.  
Following IWS recommendations around nest sites is legislated.  On other areas, maintaining 
seral distributions and maintaining a supply of large trees is important.  Assessing the 
goshawk studies and up to date information for this species is also important for future 
decisions.  
Peregrine falcon pealei:  Blue listed but not included in Identified Wildlife Management 
Strategy. Designated by COSEWIC as vulnerable.  This subspecies is not as affected by the 
pesticides DDT or DDE as anatum subspecies because of its more marine distribution.  Its 
range is restricted to northern Vancouver Island and the Queen Charlotte Islands.  
Populations are low but stable and sensitive to declines in their colonial seabird prey base  
(e.g., ancient murrelet).  These falcons nest on rocky ledges with overhanging vegetation. 
The primary management action is to locate and protect nesting habitat from disturbance.  
Implications to WFP forest management:  There are no breeding records from the TFL, but 
nearby occurrences are documented by Campbell et al. (1990).  Four nests were located in 
Cape Scott, Scott Islands, and Brooks Peninsula. 
White-tailed ptarmigan saxatilis:  Blue listed but not in Identified Wildlife Management 
Strategy.  Not addressed by COSEWIC.  This species is restricted to Vancouver Island.  
Population trends are undetermined.  Although it is known that white-tailed ptarmigan 
sometimes winter well below treeline (down to 500 m), it is not known if logging adjacent to 
its high elevation habitat affects the Ptarmigan.   
Implications to WFP forest management:  Management recommendations include leaving 
trees next to known breeding habitat for use as winter range.  No breeding areas are known 
in NVIR.  
Sandhill crane:  Blue listed and included in Identified Wildlife Management Strategy 
(IWMS).  Designated not at risk by COSEWIC.  The sandhill crane nests in wetlands with 
heavy emergent vegetation (hardhack, sedges, bullrushes).  Nesting areas tend to be >2 ha.  
This species may avoid wetlands with adjacent harvesting so buffers are useful but 
appropriate widths are as yet undetermined.   Interim measures of the IWMS suggest 50 m 
around each nest site be protected (up to 0.8 ha).  The IWMS requires that no roads be 
constructed during breeding season (early April to late August).  As well, roads should be 
gated to limit recreation access during breeding season.  Harvesting within 50 m of the 
wetland edge should retain at least 40% of codominant and dominant trees and as much of 
the understory as possible.  Harvesting or salvage is not allowed during the breeding season.  
Major staging areas are not known but if located they would also benefit from protection with 
buffers.  
Implications to WFP forest management:  A record near the Cluxewe River estuary indicates 
the sandhill crane may breed in NVIR.  Historical breeding areas included areas close to the 
Naka Creek, but no populations currently use that area.  If breeding areas are discovered 
they should be buffered according to IWMS guidelines.  
Marbled murrelet:  Red listed and included in the Identified Wildlife Management Strategy 
(IWMS).  Designated as threatened by COSEWIC.  Marbled murrelets are the only alcids 
that nest on large branches of old trees. These murrelets do not make nests but rather lay 

--- page 51 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 12 
eggs on platforms, usually on branches that are greater than 15 cm diameter.  The 
populations are assumed to be declining.  Two counts, ten years apart, on the B.C. coast 
indicate that numbers may be dropping.  Marbled murrelet are threatened by gill nets; 
conditions at sea, oil spills, and logging of old growth.   
Under interim measures of the IWMS, 113 ha or 600 m around nest site should be protected. 
The IWMS is more conservative than the interim measures and suggests that WHAs should 
be minimally 200 ha and a minimum of 600 m width.  Management guidelines within the 
WHA include not exposing more than 50% of WHA boundary to early seral conditions; not 
building roads through WHAs; protecting WHAs from fire; and encouraging development of 
structure in second growth.  Harvesting activities adjacent to WHAs should be limited during 
nesting season, April 15 to September 15.   
Implications to WFP forest management:  During 1991 road and fixed station surveys for 
marbled murrelet occurred in 12 stations in NVIR.  Murrelets were recorded at 10 of the 12 
stations.  Although detection frequencies were low relative to other areas on Vancouver 
Island, more than 50 detections occurred in the Teeta, Simpson and Cayeghle watersheds.  
WFP has a model that predicts suitable nesting habitat for marbled murrelet in the TFL.  
Ideally identification of nesting areas would be based on model results combined with 
surveys to locate nesting habitat by seeing nesting behaviour.  Population trends should be 
tracked over time, the two years of data so far do not provide reliable trends. 
Western screech owl kennicottii saturatus:  Blue listed but not included in Identified 
Wildlife Strategy.  Designated as ‘indeterminate’ by COSEWIC.  Their range is limited mainly 
to southeastern Vancouver Island and the Gulf Islands.  There is some debate to whether 
saturatus is really a different subspecies from O.k. kennicottii.  The saturatus subspecies is 
threatened by expanding human settlement.  Predation by barred owls and great horned 
owls has apparently increased in those areas and may also threaten populations.  The 
western screech owl nests in cavities of trees or snags greater than 25 cm dbh, so 
maintaining supply of cavity sites is an important management tactic.  Open deciduous or 
coniferous woodlands and riparian habitats are preferred areas for breeding.  Most nests are 
found near water and none have been located above 540 m elevation. 
Implications to WFP forest management: Campbell et al. (1990) report no breeding of 
western screech owls (of any subspecies) on northern Vancouver Island and no convincing 
records of occurrence of western screech owl on the Queen Charlotte Islands.  They breed 
primarily on southern Vancouver Island and the southern mainland.  Materi et al. (1996), 
however, reported that the kennicotti subspecies was found in Quatsino Sound area 
throughout the year and probably nests there. It is unlikely that the saturatus subspecies is 
on the tenure.  Coarse filter approaches that maintain a supply of cavity sites and declining 
trees to provide future large cavity sites should provide adequate habitat for this species. 
Northern pygmy owl swarthi:  Blue listed but not included in Identified Wildlife Management 
Strategy.  Not addressed by COSEWIC.  This subspecies, found only on Vancouver Island, 
may not actually be different than the subspecies (G. g. grinnelli) on the mainland.  Nests are 
in cavities in mixed coniferous woodlands.  For the entire species, only 5 nests were located 
prior to 1990; all of these were in conifers in old woodpecker holes (Campbell et al. 1990).  
For the swarthi subspecies, all nests have been above 490 m elevation in woodpecker holes 
on southeast coast of Vancouver Island (Materi et al 1996).  These owls seem to prefer to 
forage along edges.  Deal and Lamont (in Materi et al 1996) noted that 28 of their 38 
locations for this subspecies were below 500 m.  They also noted preliminary indications of 
preference for old growth over second growth, preference for dry Coastal Western Hemlock 

--- page 52 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 13 
(CWH) compared to very wet CWH, and avoidance of the Mountain Hemlock Zone.   
Populations of this subspecies are thought to be declining but empirical data are lacking.  
They are threatened by loss of snags and maybe also declining due to predation by 
increasing barred owl populations.  
Implications to WFP forest management:  Northern pygmy owls may be found in NVIR.  
Maintaining cavity sites and providing for an ongoing supply of dead and declining trees will 
be important for this species.  Recent studies should be examined for further information on 
preferred owl habitat.  Until more is known, the coarse filter management tactics suggested 
here will likely provide sufficient habitat for these owls. 
Hutton’s vireo:  Blue listed but not included in Identified Wildlife Management Strategy.  Not 
addressed by COSEWIC.  Hutton’s vireo ranges throughout Vancouver Island and the 
mainland.  It usually breeds below 250 m in mid- to late-successional forests that have thick 
understory vegetation.  This vireo is a leaf gleaner and some populations in B.C. may be 
migratory.  Populations are probably stable in the province and may be increasing globally, 
but trend data are sparse.  Hutton’s vireo will use 30-year-old second growth and are often 
present in small patches so it is likely not affected by fragmentation (but may be affected by 
habitat loss).  It is unclear why this species is listed except that its basic biology is relatively 
unknown.   
Implications to WFP forest management:  Hutton’s vireo is likely present in NVIR.  No special 
management seems to be required to maintain habitat for this species. 
Other species in the Identified Wildlife Management Strategy: The Identified Wildlife 
Management Strategy includes the Vaux’s swift (which is not listed as red or blue).  The swift 
likely occurs in NVIR but its breeding areas are poorly known.  They are suspected of using 
old broken top or hollow top cedars for nesting sites.  Of 13 nests found, 8 were in unused 
chimneys of vacant houses, 1 under a roof, and 2 in hollow bigleaf maple.  It also roosts in 
chimneys and hollow trees.  In natural setting hollow trees are important.  This swift forages 
in open areas and over water but needs structure of big decadent hollow trees for roosting or 
nesting. 
Other regionally significant wildlife:  The red and blue listed species and species included 
in the Identified Wildlife Management Strategy are not the only species that may require 
individual attention in the management plan.  Although concern for a wide range of species is 
becoming a high priority for many of the general public, a number of game species are still 
regionally important.  Of those black-tailed deer and black bear warrant special management 
consideration.  WFP has constructed habitat models for black bear and black-tailed deer.   
Summary of fine filter approach for NVIR 
The North Vancouver Region is home to two red-listed mammals.  One needs riparian (water 
shrew) and one probably needs cavities (Keen’s long-eared myotis).  Because Keen’s long-
eared myotis are rare and their locations and habitat requirements unknown, the water shrew 
is the red-listed mammal that merits the most management attention.  It is closely associated 
with riparian zones so riparian protection will be important for this species. 
Two red-listed birds breed in NVIR, the northern goshawk laingi and the marbled murrelet.  
Both are associated with mature and old growth forests.  Models that predict marbled 
murrelet nesting habitat have been developed and applied in the TFL, but nesting surveys 

--- page 53 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 14 
have not yet been done to further refine locations of useful Wildlife Habitat Areas for 
murrelet. 
Three blue-listed mammals occur on this portion of the Island: ermine anguinae, Vancouver 
Island wolverine, and Roosevelt elk.  Access control is key for the elk and wolverine.  
Riparian protection is also critical for elk winter ranges.  Maintaining down wood is important 
for the ermine. 
Seven blue-listed birds are likely found in this area of Vancouver Island (great blue heron, 
peregrine falcon pealei, White-tailed ptarmigan, Western screech owl kennicottii saturatus, 
northern pygmy owl swarthi, and Hutton’s vireo).  If nests sites are located for the falcon they 
need to be buffered from forestry activity and human disturbance.  Similarly, the ptarmigan 
would benefit from a forested buffer near nest areas that would provide winter cover.  The 
owls require cavities and the heron requires large live trees.  Clearly retaining old structures 
is important for these species. The sandhill crane is associated with riparian areas.  No 
management action likely is necessary for Hutton’s vireo. 
The unlisted black bear merits management attention.  Models that predict black bear habitat 
have been developed for WFP.  These should be assessed and refined.  Bear dens should 
continue to be located and protected and a supply of large trees maintained for den 
recruitment.  
Conclusion: 
Attention should be directed not just at the fine filter species but also at monitoring how 
species are associated with various stand attributes.  Thus considering the regionally 
important species, the species associated with large live trees, cavities, down wood, and 
forest interior, and species affected by booming is also important in developing plans and 
subsequent monitoring strategies. 
In addition to maintaining the stand attributes, landscape elements, and habitats for specific 
species, management to retain wildlife and biological diversity must also ensure that the 
heterogeneity of forest stands and landscapes is not substantially reduced.  No single 
management action will maintain diversity, because there are both species that benefit and 
species that suffer in every option.  For example, green-tree retention can benefit some 
canopy-dwelling birds, but reduce shrub-nesting birds (Bunnell et al. 1998).  Heterogeneity 
across a wide range of scales is therefore required (Bunnell and Huggard 1999). 
For many habitat elements, the greatest effects of management will occur many decades, or 
even several rotations, after harvest.  Downed wood, for example, may be abundant 
immediately after harvest, but will decline subsequently as it decays.  Under some short-
rotation management systems, downed wood may not be recruited prior to the next harvest, 
leading to severe depletion after several rotations (Angelstam 1997).  Changes in landscape 
patterns also may not be apparent for many decades, nor can they be changed quickly 
(Wallin et al. 1994).  Projecting the long-term effects of management actions on habitat and 
landscape element is therefore a requirement for planning to maintain forest biodiversity.  
Spatial models will be a useful tool to help assess impacts before they are expressed on the 
ground.  These tools will be important in monitoring programs that are required to allow 
management to be adaptive and change as new information is gathered. 

--- page 54 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 15 
Native terrestrial forest-dwelling vertebrates potentially breeding within NVIR. 
Table 2 indicates for all forest-dwelling vertebrates on northern Vancouver Island, their 
geographic distribution by biogeoclimatic zone, their association with various successional 
stages, their status in B.C (e.g., red or blue), their association with important stand attributes, 
and their association with landscape features such as edge, forest interior and riparian areas.  
For birds, the table also notes whether they are shrub nesters or neotropical migrants. 
Table 2: NVIR Species List 
Common Name1 CWH MH BC 3 T3 Neo4 Shr5 G6 E6 M6 L6 Cav.7 DW7 Dec8 Con8 R7 Edg9 Int10 
Roughskin Newt X X     Y          Y Y Y  
Long-toed Salamander X X      Y             Y    
Northwestern Salamander X X     Y          Y Y    
Clouded Salamander X          Y  Y  Y      
Ensatina Salamander X          Y  Y Y  Y   Y 
Western redback salamander X      Y        Y      Y 
Western Toad X X     Y             Y  
Pacific Treefrog X      Y             Y  
Red-legged Frog X X         Y         
Northern Alligator Lizard X X       Y           Y  
Common Garter Snake X X     Y           Y Y  
Northwestern Garter Snake X X       Y         Y Y  
Western Garter Snake X X       Y       Y Y  
Great Blue Heron X  B B      Y   Y   Y    
Barrow's Goldeneye X         Y 2  Y  Y   
Bufflehead X         Y 2  Y  Y   
Canada goose X      Y        Y   
Common Goldeneye X         Y 2    Y   
Common Merganser X      Y       2    Y   
Harlequin Duck X      Y        Y   
Hooded Merganser X         Y 2    Y   
Wood Duck X         Y 2    Y   
Bald Eagle X          Y      Y   
Cooper's Hawk X    Y      Y   Y      
Golden Eagle X         Y        
Northern Goshawk X  R R       Y    Y      
Osprey X    Y     Y    Y Y   
Red-tailed Hawk X    Y     Y       R+  
Sharp-shinned Hawk X X   Y  Y          Y      
American Kestrel X    Y   Y     2     Y  
Merlin X         Y 2       
Peregrine Falcon X  B B Y               
Blue Grouse X X       Y    O   Y  R+  
Ruffed Grouse X      Y        O Y   R+  
White-tailed Ptarmigan X X B B    Y        ?   
Sandhill Crane   B B   Y        Y   
Ancient Murrelet X  B B       Y        
Cassin's Auklet X  B B   Y              
Marbled Murrelet X  R R      Y    Y     
Rhinoceros Auklet X      Y              

--- page 55 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 16 
Common Name1 CWH MH BC 3 T3 Neo4 Shr5 G6 E6 M6 L6 Cav.7 DW7 Dec8 Con8 R7 Edg9 Int10 
Band-tailed Pigeon X       Y      Y      
Mourning Dove X    Y    Y       Y    R+  
Barn Owl X  B B     Y     2       
Barred Owl X X        Y 2       Y 
Great Horned Owl X          Y      Y   R+  
Northern Pygmy-Owl X X B B      Y 2    Y Y Y  
Northern Saw-whet Owl X X B B       Y 2    Y      
Western Screech-Owl X  B B       Y 2  Y  Y Y  
Common Nighthawk X    Y    Y            
Vaux's Swift X    Y     Y 2   Y      
Anna's Hummingbird X    Y M Y         Y    R+  
Rufous Hummingbird X X   Y  Y             Y    
Downy Woodpecker X           Y 1  Y    Y   
Hairy Woodpecker X X B B      Y 1   Y  Y  
Northern Flicker X X   Y  Y       1       Y  
Pileated Woodpecker X X        Y 1   Y     
Red-breasted Sapsucker X X   Y     Y 1  Y       
Dusky Flycatcher X    Y H  Y       Y   Y Y  
Eastern Kingbird X    Y M   Y       Y Y  
Hammond's Flycatcher X X   Y     Y    Y Y R+  
Least Flycatcher X       Y             
Olive-sided Flycatcher X X   Y      Y    Y Y Y  
Pacific-slope Flycatcher X X   Y      Y 2  Y  Y   
Western Wood-pewee X X   Y  Y         Y  Y    
Willow Flycatcher X    Y H  Y      Y   Y R+  
Purple Martin X  R R Y  Y       2         
Tree Swallow X X   Y    Y     2         
Violet-green Swallow X X   Y    Y     2    Y Y  
Clark's Nutcracker  X        Y         
Common Raven X X         Y           
Gray Jay X X         Y    Y      
Northwestern Crow X      Y              
Steller's Jay X X B B       Y     Y     
Chestnut-backed Chickadee X X         Y 1       Y 
Bushtit X     M  Y      Y  Y    
Red-breasted Nuthatch X X         Y 1   Y      
Brown Creeper X X           Y C   Y     Y 
Bewick's Wren X     S  Y           R+   
House Wren     Y   Y     2 O    R+  
Winter Wren X X     Y       O O   Y     Y 
American Dipper X X     Y          Y    
American Robin X X   Y  Y         Y    Y  
Golden-crowned Kinglet X X   Y       Y    Y     Y 
Hermit Thrush X X   Y  Y           Y        Y 
Ruby-crowned Kinglet [not 
confirmed] 
X X   Y       Y      Y    
Swainson's Thrush X X   Y H Y         Y   Y     
Townsend's Solitaire X X   Y  Y        O         Y 
Varied Thrush X X           Y    Y        Y 

--- page 56 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 17 
Common Name1 CWH MH BC 3 T3 Neo4 Shr5 G6 E6 M6 L6 Cav.7 DW7 Dec8 Con8 R7 Edg9 Int10 
Western Bluebird     Y  Y       2    Y      
Cedar Waxwing X X   Y  Y         Y       
Hutton's Vireo X  B B   Y             Y R+  
Red-eyed Vireo X    Y H Y         Y  Y   
Cassin's vireo X X     M Y            Y    
Warbling Vireo X X   Y M Y         Y    Y  
Black-headed Grosbeak X    Y M       Y   Y      Y 
Brown-headed Cowbird X X   Y   Y             Y  
Chipping Sparrow X X   Y   Y             Y  
Common Yellowthroat X X   Y H  Y     Y   Y Y  
Dark-eyed Junco X X     S Y             Y    
Fox Sparrow X X   Y M  Y            Y R+  
Golden-crowned Sparrow X X       Y          R+  
Lincoln's Sparrow X X   Y    Y      Y  Y R+  
MacGillivray's Warbler X X   Y H  Y      Y  Y Y  
Northern Oriole X    Y  Y         Y  Y    
Orange-crowned Warbler X X   Y S  Y           R+  
Spotted Towhee X    Y M   Y     Y    Y  
Townsend's Warbler X X   Y       Y    Y Y    
Western Tanager X X   Y       Y    Y Y    
White-crowned Sparrow X X   Y M Y            Y  
Wilson's Warbler X X   Y S   Y      Y  Y Y  
Yellow Warbler X X   Y H  Y       Y  Y    
Yellow-rumped Warbler X X   Y  Y          Y Y R+  
Evening Grosbeak X X         Y     Y      
Pine Grosbeak X X B B        Y     Y   
Pine Siskin X X   Y  Y          Y      
Red Crossbill X X         Y    Y      
Dusky Shrew X X     Y        Y       
Vagrant Shrew X X     Y        Y Y    R+  
Water Shrew X X R R   Y        Y   Y   
Big Brown Bat X X     Y    2           
California Myotis X X     Y       2           
Keen's Long-eared Myotis X X R R      Y 2   Y ?     
Little Brown Myotis X X        Y 2  Y  Y Y  
Long-legged Myotis X X        Y 2  Y    R+  
Yuma Myotis X X         Y 2  Y  Y    
Townsend's Vole X X R      Y     Y Y       
Beaver X X     Y         Y  Y   
Deer Mouse X X     Y        Y     Y  
Red Squirrel X X         Y 2   Y      
Vancouver Island Marmot  X R R     Y             
Gray Wolf X X     Y                
Cougar X X     Y        Y   Y     
Ermine X X R/B R/B   Y         Y             
Marten X X        Y 2 Y  Y   Y  
Mink X X     Y        Y          
River Otter X X     Y       O O     Y    

--- page 57 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 18 
Common Name1 CWH MH BC 3 T3 Neo4 Shr5 G6 E6 M6 L6 Cav.7 DW7 Dec8 Con8 R7 Edg9 Int10 
Wolverine X X R/B R/B        Y O O      
Raccoon X       Y       O O Y       
Black Bear X X     Y       O Y    Y  
Black-tailed Deer X X     Y             Y  
Roosevelt elk X X B B     Y           Y  
 
1   Species are ordered alphabetically by common name within families presented in conventional taxonomic order. 
3 "BC" indicates species status in the province of British Colu mbia; "T" indicates species status in WFP's forest tenure; "R" 
denotes red listed; 
  "B", blue listed; as determined by the Conservation Data Centre from the B.C. Ministry of Environment; last updated 
December 1, 1998. 
4 "Y" indicates species is a neotropical migrant; Carter and Barker (1993). 
5 Shrub nester; "H" indicates high requirement of shrubs for nesting; "M" indicates medium requirement of shrubs for nesting  
Ehrlich et al. (1988); Campbell et al. (1990 a, b, 1997). 
6 G=generalist species, showing little response to seral stage; species favored by particular seral stages are designated 
"E"(early), "M"(middle), and "L"(late). 
7 "Cav" indicates cavity user (1=primary, 2=secondary, C=crevice or cave, O=opportunistic);  DW" indicates down wood use for 
reproduction and/or feeding; 
   "R" represents riparian association.  "Y" indicates habitat association.  "?" indicates that habitat association is unknown or not 
strongly expressed. 
Riparian associations are based on statistical tests of relative abundance. 
8  Strongly associated with deciduous (Dec=Y) or coniferous (Con=Y) Hagar et al. (1995); Campbell et al. (1990 a, b, 1997); 
9 "Edg" indicates use of edge environments. "Y" represents st atistically documented preference; "R+" indicates anectodal 
evidence without statistical support. 
10 "Int" indicates forest-interior species. "Y" represents statistically documented avoidance of edge (Kremsater and Bunnell, 
1998). 

--- page 58 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 19 
Literature Cited 
Angelstam, P.  1997.  Landscape analysis as a tool for the scientific management of biodiversity.  
Ecol. Bull. (Copenhagen). 46: 140-170. 
Berg, Å., B. Ehnström, L. Gustafsson, T. Hallingbäck, M. Jonsell, and J. Weslien. 1994.  
Threatened plant, animal, and fungus species in Swedish forests: distribution and habitat 
associations.  Conservation Biology 8:718-731. 
Biodiversity Guidelines.  B.C. Ministry of Forests. 1995.  Forest Practices Code of British Columbia, 
Biodiversity guidebook.  Ministry of Forests, Victoria, B.C. 
Bunnell, F.L.  1998a  Overcoming paralysis by complexity when establishing operational goals for 
biodiversity.  J. Sust. For. 7(3/4): 145-164. 
Bunnell, F.L.  1998b.  Setting goals for biodiversity in managed forests.  Pp. 117-153 in F.L. Bunnell 
and J.F. Johnson, eds.  Policy and practices for biodiversity in managed forests:  The living 
dance.  UBC Press, Vancouver, BC. 
Bunnell, F.L.  1999. Predicted responses of species to forest practices and implications to 
monitoring. Report for MacMillan Bloedel Ltd. 
Bunnell, F.L. and D.J. Huggard.  1999.  Biodiversity across spatial and temporal scales: problems 
and opportunities.  Forest Ecology and Management 115:113-126. 
Campbell, K.L.  1995.  Testing habitat suitability models for Roosevelt elk. M.Sc. Thesis, University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C.  58 pp.  
Campbell, R.W., Dawe, N.K., Mctaggart-Cowan, I. [and others].  1990.  The birds of British 
Columbia. Vol.2, Diurnal birds of prey through woodpeckers.  University of British Columbia 
Press, Vancouver, B.C. 
Cowan, I.McT. and C.J. Guiget. 1965.  The mammals of British Columbia, 3rd edition revised.  B.C. 
Provincial Museum Handbook No. 11.  Dept. of Recreation and Conservation. Victoria, B.C.  
413 pp.  
CSP (Scientific Panel for Sustainable Forest Practices in Clayoquot Sound). 1995.  Sustainable 
ecosystem management in Clayoquot Sound. Report 1 to 5, Victoria, B.C. 
Darveau, C.H.,  Beauchesne, P., Belanger, L. (and others).  1985.  Riparian forest strips as habitat 
for breeding birds in boreal forest.  J. Wildl. Manage. 59: 67-78 
Deal and Lamont (in Materi et al 1996 but no reference given).  
Franklin, J.F.   1988.  Structural and functional diversity in temperate forests.  In.  E.O. Wilson and 
F.M. Peters (eds.)  Biodiversity.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  pp.166-175. 
Frisvoll, A.A. and T. Prestø.  1997.  Spruce forest bryophytes in central Norway and their 
relationship to environmental factors including modern forestry.  Ecography 20:3-18. 
Hunter, M.L. Jr.  1990.  Wildlife, Forests and Forestry:  principles for managing forests for biological 
diversity.  Prentice-Hall.  New Jersey. 

--- page 59 ---
 
TFL 6 – Strategy Outline for Managing Wildlife  Page 20 
Nyberg, J.B. and D. W. Janz.  1990.  Deer and elk habitats in coastal forests of southern British 
Columbia.  B.C. Ministry of Forests and B.C. Ministry of Environment, Victoria, B.C. ISBN 0-
7718-8949-6. 310 pp. 
Kaila, L., P. Martikainen and P. Punttila. 1997.  Dead trees left in clear-cuts benefit saproxylic 
Coleoptera adapted to natural disturbances in boreal forest.  Biodiversity and Conservation 
6:1-18. 
Kinley, T.A. and N.J. Newhouse.  1997.  Relationship of riparian reserve zone width to bird density 
and diversity in southeastern British Columbia. Northwest Sci.  71: 75-86 
Kremsater, L.L. and F.L. Bunnell. 1999.  Edge effects: theory, evidence and implications to 
management of western North American forests. Pp. 117-153 in  Rochelle, J.A., L. A. 
Lehmann and J.  Wisniewski (eds.).  1999.  Forest fragmentation: wildlife and management 
implications. Brill, Leiden, Netherlands. 
Materi, J.J., N.B.F Cousens, J.A. Bindernagel, and D.A. Blood.  1996.  Status of biodiversity and 
integrated resurce management in TFL 6 and TFL 25, Block 4.   (DRAFT).  Prepared for 
Western Forest Products.  
Paton, P.W.C.  1994.  The edge effect on avian nest success:  how strong is the evidence?  
Conservation Biology 8: 17-26. 
Rochelle, J.A., L. A. Lehmann and J.  Wisniewski (eds.).  1999.  Forest fragmentation: wildlife and 
management implications. Brill, Leiden, Netherlands. 
Thomas, J.W. (editor).  1979. Wildlife habitats in managed forest in the Blue Mountains of Oregon 
and Washington.  U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service Agriculture Handbook 553. 
Wallin, D.O., F.J. Swanson and B. Marks.  1994.  Landscape pattern response to changes in 
pattern generation rules: land-use legacies in forestry.  Ecological Applications 4:569-580. 
 

--- page 60 ---
 
 
Appendix XXIII 
Statement of Management Objectives, Options and 
Procedures

--- page 61 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 STATEMENT OF MANAGEMENT 
OBJECTIVES, OPTIONS AND PROCEDURES 
 
(SMOOP) 
 
for 
 
QUATSINO TREE FARM LICENCE 6 
MANAGEMENT PLAN 9 
(2000 – 2005) 
 
Including public and private lands in the vicinity 
of Port McNeill, Port Hardy, Port Alice, 
Holberg, Winter Harbour, Quatsino 
and Coal Harbour 

--- page 62 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page i 
August 1999 
Table of Contents 
 
 
1.0 TFL 6 BACKGROUND............................................................................................................................1 
1.1 H ISTORY ..................................................................................................................................................1 
1.2 S PECIAL MANAGEMENT ZONES..................................................................................................................1 
1.3 P ROTECTED AREAS ..................................................................................................................................1 
1.4 M ANAGEMENT PLAN 8...............................................................................................................................2 
1.5 S MALL BUSINESS FOREST ENTERPRISE PROGRAM.....................................................................................2 
1.6 S TATEMENT OF MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES, OPTIONS AND PROCEDURES...................................................2 
1.7 M ANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE...................................................................................................................2 
2.0 COMMITMENTS .....................................................................................................................................5 
2.1 L ICENCE APPURTENANCE COMMITMENTS ..................................................................................................5 
2.2 J OBS AND TIMBER ACCORD MARCH 9, 1999 OPERATING PLAN ..................................................................6 
2.3 M ANAGEMENT PLAN 8 COMMITMENTS .......................................................................................................6 
3.0 RESOURCE INVENTORIES...................................................................................................................7 
3.1 I NVENTORY OVERVIEW..............................................................................................................................7 
3.2 F OREST COVER........................................................................................................................................7 
3.3 E COSYSTEMS ...........................................................................................................................................7 
3.4 R IPARIAN CLASSIFICATION ........................................................................................................................7 
3.5 W ILDLIFE HABITAT ....................................................................................................................................8 
3.6 R ANGE.....................................................................................................................................................8 
3.7 C ULTURAL HERITAGE RESOURCES............................................................................................................8 
3.8 L ANDSCAPE..............................................................................................................................................8 
3.9 T ERRAIN STABILITY...................................................................................................................................9 
3.10 O PERABILITY ............................................................................................................................................9 
3.11 R ECREATION ............................................................................................................................................9 
3.12 K ARST......................................................................................................................................................9 
4.0 MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES ............................................................................................................10 
4.1 T IMBER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND UTILIZATION OBJECTIVES.............................................................10 
4.2 R ECREATIONAL USE AND VISUAL AESTHETICS OBJECTIVES......................................................................11 
4.3 B IOLOGICAL DIVERSITY OBJECTIVES........................................................................................................11 
4.4 F ISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT OBJECTIVES................................................................................................12 
4.5 I NTEGRATION WITH OTHER LICENCE OR PERMIT HOLDERS........................................................................12 
4.6 F OREST FIRE PREVENTION OBJECTIVES ..................................................................................................13 
4.7 F OREST HEALTH OBJECTIVES .................................................................................................................13 
4.8 B ASIC SILVICULTURE OBJECTIVES ...........................................................................................................13 
4.9 E NHANCED SILVICULTURE OBJECTIVES ...................................................................................................13 
4.10 C OMMUNITY AND EMPLOYMENT OBJECTIVES ...........................................................................................13 
4.11 F IRST NATIONS OBJECTIVES ...................................................................................................................14 
4.12 S OIL AND WATER OBJECTIVES ................................................................................................................14 
4.13 C ULTURAL OBJECTIVES...........................................................................................................................14 
4.14 R OAD ACCESS OBJECTIVES ....................................................................................................................14 
4.15 P UBLIC INVOLVEMENT OBJECTIVES..........................................................................................................14 
4.16 E NVIRONMENTAL MONITORING, AWARENESS AND CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVES .........................................14 
4.17 P LANNING AND INVENTORY OBJECTIVES ..................................................................................................15 
4.18 R ESEARCH OBJECTIVES..........................................................................................................................15 
4.19 B OTANICAL PRODUCT OBJECTIVES..........................................................................................................15 
4.20 C USTOMER OBJECTIVES .........................................................................................................................15 

--- page 63 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page ii 
5.0 MANAGEMENT ISSUES & OPTIONS .................................................................................................16 
5.1 H ARVEST ISSUES....................................................................................................................................16 
5.2 L AND......................................................................................................................................................17 
5.3 C OMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ....................................................................................................................18 
5.4 P UBLIC ACCESS......................................................................................................................................18 
5.5 F IRST NATIONS.......................................................................................................................................19 
5.6 L ANDSCAPE PLANNING............................................................................................................................19 
5.7 E NVIRONMENT........................................................................................................................................19 
5.8 S ILVICULTURE ........................................................................................................................................20 
5.9 C USTOMERS...........................................................................................................................................20 
6.0 TIMBER SUPPLY ANALYSIS ..............................................................................................................21 
6.1 T IMBER SUPPLY ANALYSIS ......................................................................................................................21 
6.2 T IMBER ..................................................................................................................................................21 
6.2.1 Base Case .................................................................................................................................21 
6.2.2 Historical Performance ..............................................................................................................22 
6.2.3 Other Resources .......................................................................................................................22 
6.3 S ENSITIVITY ANALYSES...........................................................................................................................22 
6.3.1 Landbase and Operability..........................................................................................................22 
6.3.2 Special Management Zones (SMZ)...........................................................................................22 
6.3.3 Volumes.....................................................................................................................................23 
6.3.4 Green-Up and Adjacency ..........................................................................................................23 
6.3.5 Alternative Silviculture ...............................................................................................................23 
6.3.6 Deciduous Stands .....................................................................................................................24 
6.3.7 Biodiversity Emphasis ...............................................................................................................24 
6.3.8 Alternative Harvest Flows..........................................................................................................24 
6.3.9 Commercial Thinning.................................................................................................................24 
6.3.10 Riparian Classification ...............................................................................................................24 
6.3.11 Wildlife Habitat...........................................................................................................................25 
6.3.12 Non-recoverable Losses............................................................................................................25 
6.3.13 Silvicultural Opportunities – Fertilization ...................................................................................25 
6.3.14 Pre-commercial thinning (PCT) .................................................................................................25 
6.3.15 Genetic Stock ............................................................................................................................25 
6.3.16 Planting Level ............................................................................................................................26 
6.3.17 Unconstrained Option................................................................................................................26 
6.4 T WENTY YEAR PLAN ...............................................................................................................................26 
6.5 L ANDSCAPE UNIT PLANNING....................................................................................................................26 
7.0 PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT AND REVIEW STRATEGY .........................................................................27 
7.1 P RE SMOOP PUBLIC REVIEW ................................................................................................................27 
7.2 D RAFT SMOOP PUBLIC REVIEW.............................................................................................................27 
7.3 R EVIEW OF DRAFT MANAGEMENT PLAN...................................................................................................27 
 

--- page 64 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 1 
10.0 TFL 6 Background 
10.1 History 
Western Forest Product’s Quatsino Tree Farm Licence 6 (TFL 6) is made up of two 
management areas located on northern Vancouver Island (see map).  Block 1 is the largest 
management unit and includes watersheds that drain either into Quatsino Sound or the 
Pacific Ocean between Quatsino Sound and San Josef Bay.  Block 2 includes watersheds 
that drain into Queen Charlotte Strait between Fort Rupert and Port McNeill. 
Block 1 is the original TFL 6 area granted to Western’s predecessor, British Columbia Pulp & 
Paper Company Limited as Quatsino Forest Management Licence 6 on October 26, 1950.  
Block 2 is the former Block 4 of Tree Farm Licence 25 which was granted to another 
predecessor company, Alaska Pine and Cellulose Limited, on May 21, 1958.  On October 1, 
1998 these two areas were consolidated into a new TFL 6 made up of Block 1 (former TFL 6) 
and Block 2 (former TFL 25 Block 4). 
The Licence covers approximately 201 500 hectares.  Just under 50% of the TFL’s forested 
area is old growth.  About 63,000 ha are classed as mature operable and 94,000 ha as 
immature operable for a total operable land base of approximately 157 000 ha (78% of total 
area). 
In 1997 forestry and milling activities supported by logging in TFL 6 sustained more than 
1200 direct jobs in coastal B.C..  Operations in TFL 6 are critical to the local economies of 
Port Alice, Winter Harbour, Holberg, Port McNeill, Coal Harbour and Port Hardy.  
10.2 Special Management Zones 
Approximately 10% of Tree Farm Licence 6 lies within two Special Management Zones: 
West Coast Nahwitti (SMZ 2) and Koprino (SMZ 4).  While these SMZs have not been 
designated through the Vancouver Island Land-Use Plan, management within the proposed 
boundaries follows the spirit and intent of the SMZ designation.  Management practices are 
guided by three documents: Planning Framework Statements for Vancouver Island’s Special 
Management Zones (Nov. 1997), Resource Management Zones for Vancouver Island (Nov. 
1997) and Low Intensity Areas for the Vancouver Island Region (Jan. 1995).   
10.3 Protected Areas 
The boundary of Tree Farm Licence 6 encompasses four Protected areas:  Raft Cove 
Provincial Park, Marble River Protected Area, Quatsino Protected Area and Misty Lake 
Protected Area.  All of these Parks and Protected Areas were created out of the TFL 6 
landbase.  Cape Scott Provincial Park, the recent Cape Scott Park extension and the Scott 
Islands Provincial Park are adjacent to the TFL.  The total protected upland and foreshore 
area in these parks is approximately 31,000 ha.  

--- page 65 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 2 
10.4 Management Plan 8 
Every five years a Tree Farm Licence holder is required to submit a new Management Plan 
to the Ministry of Forests for review and approval.  The Management Plan must contain 
commitments to coordinate and integrate the harvesting of timber and the protection and 
management of other resource values in concurrence with the activities and broad objectives 
of the Ministry of Forests (MOF).  Management Plan (MP 8) was approved by the Chief 
Forester on November 30, 1995 for the period December 1, 1995 to November 30, 2000. 
10.5 Small Business Forest Enterprise Program 
In 1995 an agreement was reached between the Ministry of Forests and Western Forest 
Products Limited, for WFP to relinquish Forest Licence AAC in the Strathcona Timber Supply 
Area and delete a small area from TFL 6.  In return WFP received the volume in TFL 6 that 
had been allocated to the Small Business Forest Enterprise Program.  This agreement 
simplified administration of TFL 6 and increased the employment security of WFP employees 
and contractors.  
10.6 Statement of Management Objectives, Options and Procedures 
The initial step in the preparation of a new Management Plan is the development of a draft 
Statement of Management Objectives, 0ptions and Procedures more commonly referred to 
as a SMOOP.  The draft SMOOP combines input from the Ministry of Forests and comments 
received from the public with the results of a corporate review of objectives, options and 
procedures. 
The public process began in August 1998 with advertisements placed in the North Island 
Gazette.  These ads requested public comment on WFP’s TFL 6 performance to date under 
Management Plan 8 as well as the identification of issues relevant to the tenure.  In addition 
to these ads, a total of 242 stakeholders were contacted directly by mail requesting input.  
10.7 Management Performance 
Western Forest Products Limited’s history of good forest stewardship has established our 
capability to fulfill forest management objectives. TFL 6 has been in existence since 1950 
and is in its fifth decade of operation.  During this time WFP and its predecessors have 
responsibly managed the licence for its long term continuance.  We are proud of the efforts 
of our employees and contractors in helping to sustain this important employment and crown 
revenue generating TFL.  
The following accomplishments indicate the licensees willingness and ability to manage the 
more than 201 500 hectares of lands and forests in Tree Farm Licence 6 in cooperation with 
government agencies, its employees and the public. 
Timber Harvesting 
• In the 49 years since the TFL was issued, the licensee has harvested the available 
Allowable Annual Cut (AAC) in compliance with cut control regulations. 
• Harvesting the timber profile has been achieved as directed by the Ministry of Forests. 

--- page 66 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 3 
• Compliance with contracting regulations has always been met. 
• Management Plan 8 approved a partitioned AAC for helicopter volume (10 200 m3) and 
medium/low/very low ecosite volume (52 000m3).  While the helicopter partition target 
has not been met due to date due to depressed markets, the low ecosite volume has 
been exceeded.  Since December 1, 1995 WFP operations have performed as follows: 
TFL 6 Summary of Partitioned AAC 
Year Helicopter m3 % of Target Low Site m3 % of Target 
1995/6 16,920 153% 246,844 438% 
1997 0 0 136,688 264% 
1998 0 0 122, 476 236% 
To Date 16,920 54% 506,008 316% 
Basic Silviculture 
• Reforestation has kept pace with harvesting since the TFL was granted in 1950. 
• The Licensee has logged just over 71 000 hectares. 
• Over one third of the harvested area has been site prepared for reforestation. 
• To the end of 1998, 37 000 000 trees have been planted on 40 000 hectares.  The 
balance of the harvested area has been stocked naturally. 
• The running balance of Not Satisfactorily Restocked (NSR) area represents less than two 
years of harvest.  This is mostly comprised of recently harvested cutblocks.    
• Since 1990, more than half of the planting stock has been selected for superior 
performance. 
• More than 24 000 hectares of vegetation management have been completed to ensure 
young stands remain free growing. 
Enhanced Silviculture 
• A program to space young stands of hemlock, fir and other species within the TFL was 
initiated in 1965.  More than 10 000 hectares have had stocking reduced to between 700 
and 1 000 stems per hectare. 
• Since 1984 pruning has been completed on 2 600 hectares of previously spaced stands. 
• More than 6 000 hectares of second growth were fertilized in TFL 6 between 1986 and 
1998. 
First Nations 
• WFP has implemented a policy of First Nations consultation and involvement in 
harvesting and silviculture activities. 
• WFP has encouraged the Quatsino Band’s development of a logging and silviculture 
capability.  The Band holds a 30,000 m3 renewable logging contract and receives direct 
awarded silviculture contracts. 
• WFP supports a Kwakiutl Band Forestry Coordinator and has encouraged the 
development of a Kwakiutl silviculture crew.   
Community Involvement 
• Forestry operations have sustained a stable TFL 6 work force.  In 1997 101 000 person-
days of direct employment, excluding manufacturing, were maintained.  The Objectives 
and Strategies for Employment and Economic Opportunities (OSEEO) attached as 
Appendix I provides details.  
• WFP has been a long time supporter of the communities of Port McNeill, Port Alice, 
Holberg and Winter Harbour.  Other communities that are directly dependent on forestry 
operations in TFL 6 include Port Hardy, Coal Harbour and Quatsino. 

--- page 67 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 4 
• WFP holds numerous Open Houses each year to present its logging and silvicultural 
plans in communities near and within TFL 6.  WFP staff are active on community boards 
and in local government.   
Recreation 
• WFP has established 12 recreation sites and 3 trails on both private and public land 
within the TFL.  These sites are maintained at WFP’s expense and are provided to the 
public at no charge.  Some sites are over thirty years old.  In 1997 we estimate there was 
more than 41 000 person-days of recreational use. 
• WFP has presented a proposal for subzoning of Special Management Zone 2 that would 
create a coastal recreation and biodiversity reserve that would run from the mouth of 
Quatsino Sound to Cape Scott Provincial Park. 
• A Recreation Inventory of TFL 6 was completed in 1990 and special studies are 
commissioned to guide future recreation developments. 
• Each year hundreds of TFL visitors participate in guided tours to view harvesting and 
forestry activities. 
• Numerous Provincial Parks or Protected Areas have been established on former TFL 6 
lands with the involvement and cooperation of WFP.  These include Raft Cove, Quatsino 
and Marble River Provincial Parks and the Misty Lake Protected Area.  WFP works 
closely with BC Parks staff on issues related to these reserves as well as Cape Scott 
Provincial Park.   WFP maintained roads on both Crown and private land provide access 
to these areas. 
Research 
• WFP maintains an active research program in TFL 6 with specific resources dedicated 
to research on regeneration problems, wildlife habitat, stream protection and other 
integrated resource issues. 
• WFP has been a major sponsor of the Salal Cedar Hemlock Integrated Research 
Program (SCHIRP) which studies old growth ecosystems that are dominated by cedar 
and salal. 
• The Licensee established the Lost Lake Seed Orchard in 1973 to provide genetically 
improved planting stock for reforestation in WFP’s tenures.  With the purchase of Pacific 
Forest Products in late 1997, the Lost Lake genetic program has been centralized at 
WFP’s new Saanich Forestry Center.  This centre concentrates on genetic improvement 
of western hemlock, western red cedar, yellow cedar and sitka spruce.   
Fire Prevention and Forest Health 
• There have only been minor forest health and protection issues over the history of TFL 6.   
• The most visible damage has been cyclical infestations of black-headed budworm.  This 
pest has caused significant defoliation but little tree mortality.  WFP has cooperated in 
tests of biological control agents for this best.   
• The sitka spruce shoot weevil has seriously affected the range in which sitka spruce can 
be planted.  This issue is being addressed through the Saanich Forestry Centre tree 
improvement program.   
• The most serious abiotic forest health issue is windfall as wildfire is almost unknown.  
The licence has a history of catastrophic windfall (16 000 ha in 1906).  The licensee will 
continue to explore local Best Management Practices that will recognize this abiotic 
issue. 

--- page 68 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 5 
11.0 COMMITMENTS 
11.1 Licence Appurtenance Commitments 
Tree Farm Licence 6 commitments are contained in both the original TFL 6 and TFL 25 
documents.  The original TFL 6 licence was issued in 1950 and replaced in 1980 and 1995. 
The following is a brief synopsis of TFL 6 commitments: 
/g216/g32TFL 6 Agreement – October 26, 1950- BC Pulp & Paper Company – Licencee will 
process 15,000,000 cubic feet of fiber suitable for pulp and paper production in the 
licensee’s mills on Quatsino Sound. 
/g216/g32
TFL 6 Agreement – January 1, 1980 – Rayonier Canada (B.C.) Ltd – No milling 
requirements.  Minister requires a notice of mill closure or production curtailment that will 
last longer than 90 days.   
/g216/g32
TFL 6 Agreement – March 1, 1995 – Western Forest Products Limited – Licensee to 
process licence or equivalent volume through owned or affiliated mills.  Minister requires 
notice of mill closure or production curtailment that will last longer than 90 days.  
Tree Farm Licence 25 was issued in 1958.  The agreement was replaced in 1979 and again 
in 1989.  Timber processing requirements are as follows: 
/g216/g32TFL 25 Agreement – May 21, 1958 – Alaska Pine and Cellulose Limited – Licensee 
will maintain manufacturing plants capable of using the allowable cut from the licence 
area. 
/g216/g32TFL 25 Agreement – May 21, 1979 – Rayonier Canada (B.C.) Limited – Timber 
processing facilities cannot be closed or capacity reduced without prior approval from the 
Minister. 
/g216/g32 TFL 25 Agreement – May 21, 1989 – Western Forest Products Limited – The 
Minister requires three months notice of mill closure or a major reduction in mill capacity.   
Performance 
Through to the end of 1997, individual harvest volumes for TFL 6 and TFL 25 were within 5% 
of cut control target for the current five year period.  The TFL 6 harvest volume since 1951 is 
within 1% of target.   The TFL 25 harvest volume since 1958 is also within 1%.   
TFL 6 produced 1.223 million m3 of logs in 1997.  Seventy-nine percent was used in Doman 
or Western Pulp (WP) mills while the balance was traded.  TFL 6 could provided 30% of the 
Port Alice mill pulp log needs. 
TFL 25 produced 648,000 m3 of logs in 1997.  Seventy-one percent was used in Doman or 
WP mills while the balance was traded.  TFL 25 provided 5% of the Port Alice mill pulp log 
needs.  The balance of the Port Alice mill’s volume came from other WFP tenures and log 
purchases. 
Overall, WFP tenures provided 70% of WP and Doman mill needs in 1997 (2.4 vs 3.4 million 
m3).  Log sales of 545,000 m3 were off-set by 1.44 million m3 in purchases.  Chip sales of 

--- page 69 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 6 
35,000 BDUs were off-set by purchases of 329,000 BDUs.  The timber processing 
commitments contained within the TFL 6 agreement were met or exceeded through log and 
chip purchase. 
11.2 Jobs and Timber Accord March 9, 1999 Operating Plan 
Doman Industries committed to create 162 new jobs under the terms of the Jobs and Timber 
Accord.  Since March 1996 104 of these jobs have been created.  It is anticipated that by the 
conclusion of the accord in December 2001 an additional 80 to 90 jobs will have been 
created. 
Since inception of the FRBC program Doman Industries has more than fulfilled the 
company’s share of the new job target for the program. 
Since inception of the JTA Operating Plan, Doman Industries has increased the volume used 
in the remanufacturing sector by making available close to 18% of Doman’s AAC for value 
added processing.   
11.3 Management Plan 8 Commitments 
The Chief Forester’s approval letter for Management Plan 8 identified seven items that were 
to be addressed during the Management Plan period.  In addition, other items were identified 
in the Ministry pre-SMOOP review.  These commitments have been addressed in earlier 
correspondence to the Ministry and where applicable have been noted in the draft SMOOP. 

--- page 70 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 7 
12.0 RESOURCE INVENTORIES 
12.1 Inventory Overview 
Approval letters for specific inventories are not always available, in part because of the age 
of the inventory work. Earlier inventory programs did not always require Ministry review and 
approval.  Specific advance approval letters were not required where the results and 
methodology were subject to MOF scrutiny. Approval of previous Management Plans is 
taken to be tacit approval of the inventories used except where specific comments were 
made. We expect that as new inventories are completed, this issue will be addressed. 
12.2 Forest Cover 
The most recent field inventory was done between 1968 and 1970. Subsequently, this 
inventory has been updated to account for the area harvested and regenerated as well as 
other changes. This updated inventory was used for MP 8. Because of its age, it has no 
formal letter of approval. However at the time it was done, methodology followed MoF 
recommendations. 
WFP has recently begun a new VRI project for TFL 6 that is planned for completion in 2001. 
Preliminary discussions with the MoF Region have been undertaken (May 11,1999).  Phase 
1 will be carried out in 1999/2000 and Phase 2 in 2000/2001. 
12.3 Ecosystems 
An inventory completed by Dr. T. Lewis has been used as a guide for reforestation activities 
and site productivity since 1985.    
The use of the ecological information for estimation of site productivity was raised as an 
issue in the approval of MP8. A project was undertaken by J. S. Thrower in 1996 to assess 
the validity of this approach. The report confirmed the approach used in MP 8. The average 
site index Thrower obtained was 0.3 m higher than that used in MP 8. A letter approving the 
Thrower report was received from A. Nussbaum of Research Branch on April 18,1997.  This 
letter confirmed that this approach was suitable for use in MP 9. 
12.4 Riparian Classification 
A comprehensive riparian inventory has not been completed for the entire TFL.  However, 
operational stream inventories have been conducted since 1988 and a Resource Inventory 
Committee project is underway.  These two sources will provide a great deal of site specific 
survey information for Management Plan use.  WFP intends to utilize this detailed work in 
conjunction with GIS modeling to obtain an overall estimate of riparian classes for the TFL.  
This approach will be outlined in detail in the timber supply analysis information package.   

--- page 71 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 8 
12.5 Wildlife Habitat  
Until recently wildlife inventories focused on only a handful of species.  In the late 1970’s and 
early 1980’s fourteen deer winter range areas totaling 2040 ha were established in TFL 6. In 
1998 the majority of these sites were grandfathered as Ungulate Winter Ranges.  A regular 
inventory of eagle nests was also maintained for operational planning purposes.  
As the interest in wildlife broadened, so did the inventory efforts.  D. Blood & Associates 
completed a TFL 6 biodiversity overview in 1996.  In 1998 and 1999 the fourteen deer winter 
ranges mentioned above as well as other potential wildlife habitat areas were evaluated to 
identify and classify potential habitat for ungulates as well as several other species. A final 
report will be available in mid-1999. 
For purposes of MP 9, WFP intends to maintain a wildlife habitat commitment comparable to 
that used in MP 8. 
12.6 Range 
There is no range in the TFL. 
12.7 Cultural Heritage Resources 
WFP operations utilize an Archaeological Overview Assessment of the Port McNeill Forest 
District completed by I.R.Wilson and Associates in 1995 as well as site specific 
Archaeological Impact Assessments conducted by WFP funded consultants who work 
closely with the Quatsino and Kwakiutl Bands. In addition, there is information on file from 
the MOF, the Archaeology Branch and First Nations sources. 
WFP supported FRBC funding of the Quatsino First Nation Traditional Use Study (TUS).  We 
are currently in discussions with the Quatsino First Nation for access to the less sensitive 
portions of this Study.  WFP also provided letters of support for the Galgalis Traditional Use 
Study that would have classified the traditional territory of the Kwakiutl First Nation.  To date 
this study has not produced useable information. 
12.8 Landscape 
The TFL 6 Landscape Inventory was completed in 1994 to MOF standards.  In early 1995, 
the unofficial designation of two Low Intensity Areas within the TFL required that the area of 
the original inventory be expanded to include portions of the LIAs not covered by the original 
work.  This additional inventory work was completed in late 1995.   
In late 1998 and early 1999 Western Forest Products and Ministry staff cooperated on a 
strategy to mitigate the impacts of visual restrictions on timber supply.  Out of this strategy 
came the designation by the Port McNeill District Manager of “known” scenic areas. 
The known scenic areas map was large scale and not suitable for operational planning.  It is 
currently being reviewed and will be reproduced by the District  The final version of the 
known scenic areas map will be used for the MP timber supply analysis.   

--- page 72 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 9 
12.9 Terrain Stability 
The terrain stability inventory for Block 1 was completed to MOF standards in 1995. The 
terrain stability inventory for Block 2 was completed in 1992 and updated to MOF standards 
in 1998 as directed by the Chief Forester in his review of TFL 25 Management Plan 8.  This 
higher level inventory is supplemented by individual field terrain assessments. 
12.10 Operability  
The reclassification of TFL 6 operability was completed in early 1999.  The methodology 
used was approved by the Port McNeill District on September 29, 1998. The final maps and 
report are complete and will be submitted to the Port McNeill District office.   
12.11 Recreation 
The TFL recreation inventory was completed in February 1990.  Since 1990 access to the 
west coast has improved and WFP has developed additional recreation sites.  However, the 
overall patterns of use and the types of use have not changed significantly.  During the term 
of MP 9 WFP staff will review the current inventory with District staff and determine whether 
or not the expense of a new inventory is warranted.   
12.12 Karst 
A review of karst features was completed by P.Griffith for TFL 6 in 1979.  This inventory was 
developed for forest management purposes and was not released to the public at the request 
of the BC Speleological Society.  Since 1979, new karst features have been recorded and 
dealt with on an individual basis incorporating local users input and taking District direction. 

--- page 73 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 10 
13.0 MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES 
Western Forest Product’s goal is to have forest operations and practices that are 
economically viable, environmentally appropriate and socially acceptable.  The following 
objectives aim to achieve these three goals:   
13.1 Timber Resource Management and Utilization Objectives 
• Economically harvest the Licensee’s portion of the basic TFL 6 AAC of approximately 1 
476 758 m
3 in accordance with the principles of Integrated Resource Management (IRM) 
and the Forest Practices Code.  The Licensee’s portion of the proposed AAC is about 1 
464 264 m3.  The Small Business Forest Enterprise Program AAC is about 13 242 m3.   
• Develop and implement alternative harvest systems to utilize all levels of operability 
including a partitioned AAC of approximately 10 200 m3 for helicopter harvesting. 
• Continue to harvest medium, low and very low ecosite lands so that the partitioned 
harvest AAC (52 000 m3) is met or exceeded. 
• Explore the use of alternative silviculture systems.  Areas where alternative systems may 
be employed are: older second growth stands scheduled for commercial thinning; high 
elevation montane stands where regeneration of Abies species has been difficult; riparian 
areas where other resource values outweigh timber values; wildlife areas where certain 
structural features need to be retained and finally visually sensitive areas. 
• Maintain economically viable forestry and manufacturing operations based on optimum 
utilization of timber values through internal manufacture and trading of logs to gain the 
highest value and margin. 
• Harvest the optimum quantity and quality of pulp and sawlogs from over mature, mature 
and rotation age timber stands within the constraints imposed by cut control regulations, 
approved harvesting plans, market demand and forest inventory profile. 
• Optimize the opportunity to harvest special forest products generated through prime 
logging activities in the TFL. 
• Commercial thinning trials conducted during the term of MP 8 were not encouraging from 
either an economic or forest health perspective.  The partitioned AAC for commercial 
thinning (5,000 m3) will be explored but not implemented until suitable harvesting systems 
are developed and markets are favorable. 
• Meet or exceed the requirements of the Timber Harvest Contracting Regulation. 
• Manage developing immature stands with consideration for site productivity, ecosystem 
capability and species suitability for optimum volume production while ensuring a suitable 
mixture of sawlogs and pulplogs are produced. 
• Refine the profile of the products to be produced in the yield analysis and Management 
Plan to guide long range planning.
 

--- page 74 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 11 
13.2 Recreational Use and Visual Aesthetics Objectives 
• Integration of TFL recreational plans with Ministry of Forests District plans, the Regional 
District of Mount Waddington, BC Parks and private operators.  Provide recreational 
opportunities that compliment rather than compete with these other providers.   WFP’s 
focus will be on low maintenance access to natural features (i.e. West Coast recreational 
beaches).    
 
• Maintain public access to WFP recreational sites and cooperate on access to provincial 
and private sites.
 
• Work with recreational license holders to ensure that recreational crown land use is 
coordinated with forest management.     
• Maintain visual landscape quality by integrating landscape inventories and analysis with 
forest harvest planning. 
• Integrate the recreation objectives of Special Management Zones (SMZ) and Protected 
Area (PAs) established under the Vancouver Island Land Use Plan (VILUP) into the 
recreation spectrum of the TFL. 
• Manage the full spectrum of recreation opportunities based on the capability of the land 
base. 
• Work with Ministry staff and cave/karst groups to ensure that forest management 
activities do not impact on significant cave/karst resources. 
• Incorporate known scenic values into landscape level planning.  Work with Ministry staff 
to mitigate the potential impact of landscape inventory restrictions on Timber Supply. 
• Sustain the current 41 000 user days of recreation in the TFL. 
13.3  Biological Diversity Objectives 
• Maintain biological diversity at both a stand and landscape level. 
• Stand level structure and biodiversity will be addressed through the retention of riparian 
reserves, wildlife tree patches and coarse woody debris where their respective retention 
can be expected to provide rotational value. 
• Landscape level biodiversity will be maintained through the designation of Old Growth 
Management Areas, Wildlife Habitat Areas and other landscape level reserves.  
Guidance will be provided by integrating the Identified Wildlife Management Strategy with 
the Landscape Unit Planning Guidebook. 
 
• Patch size distribution will be varied over time to meet Landscape Unit targets that match 
Natural Disturbance Type and Biogeoclimatic variant.   
 

--- page 75 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 12 
13.4 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Objectives 
• Stream protection measures identified in the FPC Act and Regulations will be adhered to 
until Best Management Practices suited to TFL 6 biogeoclimatic conditions are developed 
and approved. 
• WFP will cooperate in the collection of fish and wildlife resource information needed to 
develop Total Resource Plans for the licence area. 
• Integrate wildlife objectives in forest management planning by implementing the Identified 
Wildlife Management Strategy and Landscape Unit Planning guidebooks and other 
proposals for maintaining biological diversity. 
• Assess status of important wildlife species habitat through landscape level inventories, 
mapping and modeling projects. 
• Protect important fish and wildlife habitat through referral of plans and consultation with 
the appropriate agencies, First Nations and interest groups.  Continue operational 
updating of existing stream classification in TFL 6. 
• Maintain the productive capability of streams for fisheries values by restoring or 
enhancing habitat through the Watershed Restoration Program.   
• Cooperate with fishery and wildlife agencies in enhancement projects where 
opportunities exist.  Current enhancement programs support the Cordy, Colonial and 
Marble River hatcheries.   
13.5 Integration with Other Licence or Permit Holders 
Trappers 
Provide advance notice of potential development through the Ministry of Environment Lands 
and Parks to allow trapline interests to adjust their harvesting plans. MELP maintains a 
confidential list of trapline holders. 
Guide Outfitters 
• Provide advance notice of potential development through the Ministry of Environment 
Lands and Parks to allow guide outfitters to adjust their hunting and fishing plans.  MELP 
maintains a confidential list of guide outfitters. 
Recreational Licensees 
• While no backcountry recreational licences have been issued in TFL 6, some future use 
can be expected.  WFP will work with these commercial licence holders to ensure that 
public recreational opportunities are not compromised and their use is coordinated with 
forest management.      
Other Forest Licensees 
• Provide other forest licensees with data on WFP harvest plans in order to allow accurate 
presentation of adjacent development.  Cooperate on the issuance of Road Use Permits 
and Road Use Agreements. 
 

--- page 76 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 13 
Other Users 
• Other license or permit holders who may be affected by WFP operations (water licence, 
aquaculture, mineral, etc) will be provided with advance notice of development as 
required to ensure that their interests are recognized in operational plans. 
13.6 Forest Fire Prevention Objectives 
• Limit fire losses through active fire prevention and suppression activities. 
• Use prescribed burning to meet site establishment goals as well as to address fuel hazard 
issues.   
• Monitor forest resource losses from fire. 
13.7 Forest Health Objectives 
• Monitor forest health through periodic surveys. 
• Use forest practices that will not make stands more susceptible to disease or insect attack.   
• Protect and enhance the productivity of TFL 6 forest resources through management 
practices that minimize losses from insects, disease and other damaging agents including 
abiotic factors such as wind. 
• Monitor forest resource losses from insects, disease and other damaging agents to ensure 
they are maintained at levels below socially and environmentally acceptable thresholds. 
• Ensure forest health issues are managed in a manner that maintains, recovers or confirms 
the short and long term productivity of TFL 6 forests. 
• Enhance the health of planted trees through genetic selection of parent trees exhibiting pest 
and disease resistance.    
13.8 Basic Silviculture Objectives 
• Meet or exceed basic silviculture obligations in accordance with the various Acts and 
Regulations.  
• Explore “enhanced” basic silviculture opportunities at both the crop establishment and 
maintenance stages. 
• Regenerate all harvested areas promptly with ecologically suitable species.  Encourage 
natural regeneration and whenever possible utilize genetically improved planting stock.   
• Use appropriate vegetation management strategies to ensure early free growing status and 
minimize the use of herbicides. 
13.9 Enhanced Silviculture Objectives 
• Fertilize new forests with the goal of enhancing second growth production. 
• Provide stocking control or prune stands to meet social and other resource objectives. 
• Continue drainage trials to explore opportunities to increase the productivity of wet sites.    
13.10 Community and Employment Objectives 
• Maintenance of communities economically dependent on TFL operations. 
• Continue the WFP corporate commitment to sustaining employment and community stability 
subject to technological change and maintenance of AAC. 

--- page 77 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 14 
13.11 First Nations Objectives 
• Formation of strategic alliances with First Nations interested in economic development for 
their communities and employment opportunities for their members through increased 
involvement in the Forest Industry. 
• Accommodate aboriginal sustenance and traditional use activities. 
• Continue to improve communication and consultation processes with First Nations.  Develop 
strategies that protect First Nation’s interests while allowing resource extraction.   
• Expand First Nations involvement in cultural assessments,  resource inventories, 
harvesting, silviculture and environmental restoration. 
13.12 Soil and Water Objectives 
• Maintain slope stability through use of overview terrain stability mapping and field terrain 
assessments to guide forest operations.  
• Use forest practices that maintain or enhance the productivity of forest soils. 
• Ensure that forest management activities recognize downstream water quality values 
including fish bearing waters, licenced use and other domestic use. 
13.13 Cultural Objectives 
• Protect cultural features considered significant by First Nations and non-First Nations 
communities. 
• Support initiatives to establish and expand cultural inventories (i.e. Traditional Use Studies).   
• Explore opportunities to showcase representative examples of cultural features in 
cooperation with First Nations and non-First Nations groups. 
13.14  Road Access Objectives 
• Risk manage the deactivation of roads no longer required for timber harvesting.   
• Leave roads with low environmental risk open to 2WD and 4WD traffic to facilitate second 
growth management and provide other users with commercial and recreational access.   
• Continue semi-permanent or permanent deactivation of roads that pose a significant 
environmental hazard. 
13.15 Public Involvement Objectives 
• Ensure public expectations for good forestry practices are met in the management of the 
TFL through comprehensive public review processes. 
• Promote public understanding of forestry issues and practices by maintaining informational 
signs on the major public routes in TFL 6 and providing forestry tours during the peak 
summer visitor period.   
• Continue involvement in local Resource Boards and Local Advisory Committees. 
13.16 Environmental Monitoring, Awareness and Certification Objectives 
• Monitor company compliance with environmental rules and regulations through a program of 
comprehensive internal forest practice and environmental audits. 
• Promote employee and contractor commitment to WFP environmental policy through 
training programs for workers and the establishment of joint IWA/WFP Environmental 
Committees where appropriate. 

--- page 78 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 15 
• Continue to pursue domestic and international certification under the Forest Stewardship 
Council, Canadian Standards Association and the International Standards Organization.   
13.17 Planning and Inventory Objectives 
• Complete inventories of the resource information and mapping needed for preparation of 
Total Resource Plans. 
• Identify and develop quantitative measures for resource inventories that will be needed over 
time to monitor and demonstrate compliance with the stated objectives. 
13.18 Research Objectives 
• Develop techniques that will optimize timber harvest levels while maintaining key 
environmental values.   
• Develop enhanced silviculture techniques and strategies for regeneration of exceptional 
sites and minor species. 
• Continue commitments to monitoring the Salal Cedar Hemlock Integrated Research 
Program (SCHIRP) research trials. 
13.19 Botanical Product Objectives 
• Encourage sustainable harvest of botanical products such as yew bark, salal, mushrooms, 
cedar oil and honey by working with local operators interested in entering these fields.   
13.20 Customer Objectives 
• Maintain market access for products through customer information programs related to 
WFP's management of TFL 6. 
• Encourage and arrange tours of TFL 6 for customers to view forest operations and see 
sustainable forestry practices. 

--- page 79 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 16 
14.0 MANAGEMENT ISSUES & OPTIONS 
14.1 Harvest Issues 
TFL 6 Undercut – At the end of the current cut control period (1995-99) it is anticipated that 
90% of the periodic AAC will have been harvested.  This is within cut control requirements.   
Options available for utilizing the remaining volume are to: 
• Allow this volume to return to the primary volume pool in order to marginally raise harvest 
rates in subsequent cut control periods.     
• Assume that the 10% undercut will be harvested at a steady (+2%) rate in the 
subsequent five year cut control period. 
• Assume that the 10% undercut will be harvested in first two years of the cut control 
period as outlined in the Jobs and Timber Accord.     
Commercial Thinning – Between 1996 and 1998 a number of commercial thinning trials 
were conducted in hemlock stands in Block 2 of TFL 6.  These trials were disappointing from 
both an economic and a forest health perspective.  In spite of stronger hemlock markets than 
now being experienced, thinnings were uneconomic.  In addition, the residual stand damage 
was considered unacceptable relative to WFP’s extended rotation plans.   Options: 
• Drop commercial thinning as a silviculture treatment. 
• Model for commercial thinning on suitable sites but don’t implement operationally until the 
forest health and economic problems have been resolved. 
Deciduous Conversion – No deciduous stands were harvested during the current 
Management Plan.  There has been some interest in the small volume of alder found in TFL 
6 from deciduous operators.  Options: 
• Maintain the status quo with deciduous volumes not contributing to the TFL AAC.  
Assume these areas will be converted to conifer or managed alder when adjacent conifer 
development is proposed. 
• Determine a partitioned AAC for that portion of the deciduous inventory which is not 
environmentally restricted. 
Small Business Program – Through volume trades and a deletion from the TFL, the Small 
Business Program has been significantly reduced in size.  Options: 
• Maintain the current SBFEP program within the TFL. 
• Transfer additional area from the TFL into the Kingcome TSA to extinguish the SBFEP.   
• Consider creation of a new First Nations Woodlot or Community Forest licence, to be 
technically managed by WFP that would utilize the SBFEP AAC.  
Windfall – The forested area at risk to windthrow has been significantly increased by the 
spatial and riparian requirements of the Forest Practices Code.  The areas at risk include 
cutblock edges, riparian zones and wildlife tree patches.  If harvesting moves to more use of 
retention systems there will be more areas at risk.  Options: 
• Maintain the status quo.  This will increase unsalvaged losses relative to historic values 
and potentially impact environmental values.   
• Develop localized Best Management Practices that will minimize windthrow and 
windthrow impacts.  

--- page 80 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 17 
Regardless of the option chosen, work will continue on refining a methodology to determine 
the non-salvaged losses associated with windfall. 
Stumpage Waterbedding – Low timber values combined with the present appraisal system 
make it very difficult to operate in some coastal areas during economic downturns. 
Opportunities may exist to allow tenures with higher timber values to “carry” these lower 
value areas during poor markets.  This would benefit coastal communities.  Options: 
• Maintain status quo that will minimize economic activity in some coastal areas. 
• Explore new appraisal policies that would allow a licensee to spread operating costs 
across a number of operations and tenures in order to maintain operations
 
14.2 Land 
Vacant Crown Land Reversions – Most would agree that area based tenures have been 
the most successful licenses issued by the Crown due to the greater security provided for 
investment.  Significant Vacant Crown Land areas still exist within the boundaries of TFL 6 
that would be more efficiently managed by the licensee.  Options: 
• Maintain the status quo with isolated Crown lands being managed at a distance by the 
Crown. 
• Add the reverted Timber Licenses found near Port Alice and Holberg Inlet to TFL 6 to 
allow local management. 
• Add the Crown forest land associated with the BHP minesite on Rupert Inlet to TFL 6 
once the environmental mitigation measures are complete.  This site may be best suited 
to a rotation of hardwoods prior to establishing conifer stands.   
• Add the Crown forest land associated with the former CFS San Josef townsite to TFL 6 
once the DND responsibilities have been completed.  This site may also be suited to a 
rotation of hardwoods prior to establishing conifer stands. 
Management and Development of Recreation Sites – Over the past thirty years Western 
Forest Products has funded the development and maintenance of a dozen recreation areas 
and three additional trails within TFL 6.  The majority of these sites were developed under 
the “umbrella” approval of the Tree Farm Licence and have not been officially designated as 
recreation areas.  In 1999 the Ministry of Forests instituted a policy of charging fees for use 
of Crown land campgrounds.  WFP refused to charge fees for sites the company had 
developed and maintained at our own cost. Options: 
• Maintain status quo with WFP funding and managing existing recreation sites without 
charging user fees. 
• Designate sites under Section 6 of the Forest Practices Code Act with the Ministry 
assuming responsibility for maintenance and collection of fees. 
• Authorize site maintenance and construction under Section 102 of the FPC Act with WFP 
funding and managing site without charging user fees.   
Acknowledgement of other Uses – The Crown has permitted members of the public to 
illegally establish recreation sites on Victoria Lake.  It is time for this illegal use to be 
addressed.  Options: 
• Removal of trespass structures.
 
• Zoning of portions of the Victoria Lake Foreshore with a number of new lease lots setting 
a market price for trespass sites.  
• Consider fee simple sales versus renewable leases. 
• Covenants on the legitimized sites that will not encumber adjacent forest development. 

--- page 81 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 18 
14.3 Community Development  
Port Alice Community Development – A number of communities are located within the 
boundaries of TFL 6.  While the prime purpose a TFL lands is to produce a sustainable 
supply of forest products, it is recognized that a higher use of some forest land is for 
community development.  In the case of Port Alice, there are few options remaining to 
expand the townsite or to provide locations for industrial use.  WFP will be receptive to 
legitimate requests for forest land for community expansion or industrial sites to help diversify 
the Village economy.    
Quatsino Sound Initiative - A fisheries initiative is being proposed to develop and manage 
wild finfish, farmed finfish and farmed shellfish within Quatsino Sound.  WFP will cooperate 
with any initiatives that can help diversify the economy of Quatsino Sound without impacting 
on our forest management activities and the economic interests of our company, employees 
and contractors. 
14.4 Public Access 
Road Deactivation – Operational and Watershed Restoration road deactivation programs 
have expanded dramatically since 1994.  Aggressive deactivation in the early years of the 
program resulted in many low risk roads becoming impassable to two wheel drive traffic.  
This has posed a problem for recreational and commercial users such as beekeepers and 
special forest  products operators . This was raised as a public issue during the review of MP 
8.   
WFP maintains an “open road” policy and wherever possible tries to maintain access to 
popular public sites.  WFP will continue to promote public access by working with Ministry of 
Forest staff to minimize deactivation of low risk road systems.  Public consultation on 
deactivation plans will continue to be provided through WRP Access and Forest 
Development Plan reviews.   
Quatsino Road Access – During the term of the next Management Plan forest roads 
originating from our Holberg Forest Operation will be developed behind the community of 
Quatsino.  Quatsino currently has no road connection to other North Island communities.  
While WFP has no plans to link up Quatsino to our roads, we will be receptive to the wishes 
and desires of both the community and the Quatsino First Nation.   
Access to Provincial Parks  - Public access to the Marble River, Quatsino, Raft Cove and 
Cape Scott Provincial Parks requires the use of TFL forest roads.  In the case of Raft Cove 
and Cape Scott Parks access is on private roads owned by WFP.  BC Parks has not 
provided funding for public access and has depended on maintenance associated with 
timber harvesting as well as the good will of WFP.  WFP will continue to maintain roads 
required for forest management purposes but will approach BC Parks for cost sharing of the 
maintenance of private roads not required for forest management purposes. 

--- page 82 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 19 
14.5 First Nations 
First Nations Relations and Capacity Building – WFP is interested in maintaining good 
relations with First Nations.  As a licence holder we believe the best approach is to build 
economic relationships with First Nations as well as help them build their capacity to deal 
with forest management issues.  This policy will continue with the next Management Plan.    
Douglas Treaty – The Kwakiutl First Nation is in discussions with the federal government on 
the Douglas Treaty.  The Treaty area includes a significant portion of Block 2 of TFL 6 
between Port Hardy and Port McNeill.  WFP suspended harvesting in the Treaty area at the 
Kwakiutl’s request in 1997 pending their discussion with the federal government.  It is WFP’s 
intention to deal with this issue outside of the Kwakiutl – federal government discussions and 
resume limited operations within the Douglas area.    
14.6 Landscape Planning 
Special Management Zones – The TFL contains the Koprino and the West Coast Nahwitti 
SMZs.  While these zones have not been designated in a higher level plan both WFP and the 
respective agencies (Forests, Environment, Tourism) have been operating in the spirit and 
intent of the designation.  The TSA analysis will be applying suitable constraints.   
Identified Wildlife Management Strategy and Landscape Unit Planning – Both of these 
new policies are being introduced as this SMOOP is being advertised.  The TSA will 
incorporate values as defined through these two processes.   
Scenic Areas – A landscape inventory has been completed for the visible areas of TFL 6.  
The Ministry of Forests has also identified “known” scenic areas that cover a smaller area 
than our current analysis.  The known scenic area map is being reviewed by Ministry staff.  
The revised map will be used in the TSA analysis. 
14.7  Environment 
Fisheries and Riparian Issues – Much of TFL 6 lies on subdued terrain with low gradient 
streams.  These streams have high fisheries values.  The provincial riparian management 
procedures do not adequately address the special environmental conditions found in those 
portions of the TFL which experience heavy winter storms.  WFP will continue to explore 
alternative riparian management prescriptions that will protect riparian values and minimize 
windfall.    
Biodiversity – WFP funded a biodiversity overview of TFL 6 in 1996 to investigate the 
current state of biological diversity and integrated resource management.  Some of the 
recommendations from this report were incorporated into WFP operational planning 
guidelines.  Recent government policy changes through the Identified Wildlife Management 
Strategy and the Landscape Unit Planning process have taken biodiversity management in a 
different direction than proposed in 1996.  Management Plan 9 will incorporate the new 
biodiversity direction.  
  

--- page 83 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 20 
14.8 Silviculture 
Western Forest Products has a local staff of sixteen foresters whose primary responsibility is 
to ensure that WFP silviculture responsibilities are met.  Western Forest Products basic 
silviculture practices meet and in many cases exceed government requirements.  WFP staff 
also implement an enhanced silviculture program that balances technical with social 
objectives.  There are three outstanding silviculture issues: 
Provincial versus localized standards – Until a TFL Management Plan is accepted as a 
higher level plan, there will conflict between localized and provincial standards.  It is WFP’s 
intention to have the localized silviculture standards in MP 9 accepted as higher level plan 
objectives.   
Technical versus social objectives – TFL 6 is a “mature” license with a relatively balanced 
age class distribution.  Hemlock and cedar are the main second growth species.  As a result 
,there is little technical benefit from some socially preferred enhanced treatments such as 
juvenile spacing or pruning.  On the other hand, the high proportion of salal dominated sites 
means that there are technically preferred treatments (fertilization) which do not have 
immediate social benefits. 
Enhanced basic silviculture – Basic treatments could be “enhanced” in order to yield both 
social and technical benefits.  However, this raises issues with government standards.  In 
Management Plan 9 it is proposed to describe an enhanced basic program.  
 
14.9 Customers 
Customer confidence and certification – The international marketplace is becoming 
increasingly sophisticated.  Forest companies must reduce or control costs but at the same 
time address environmental issues.  Key to international market access will be the 
certification of WFP forest practices and products.  Management Plan 9 will outline how WFP 
proposes to address both market access and certification issues.   

--- page 84 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 21 
15.0 TIMBER SUPPLY ANALYSIS 
15.1 Timber Supply Analysis 
The Timber Supply Analysis (TSA) to be undertaken will provide estimates of timber harvest 
levels over time that are a function of land base, timber volumes and growth rates as well as 
a number of constraints aimed at enhancing various non-timber aspects of the forest. 
The TSA analysis provides the vehicle through which various scenarios are developed that 
integrate this information to assist decision makers in developing recommendations 
regarding setting an AAC for the TFL. 
The timber supply analysis will be an exercise whereby resource inventory information, 
growth and yield information and harvest levels will be analyzed in a spatially explicit fashion 
incorporating constraints imposed by the Forest Practices code, to derive sustainable harvest 
levels. 
We propose to use the model ATLAS developed at the University of British Columbia (UBC) 
to undertake a spatially explicit constrained modeling exercise. Although the analysis will 
concentrate on the TFL as a whole, we intend to examine individual operating areas within 
the TFL, which coincide with the major logging centres (Port McNeill, Holberg, and Jeune 
Landing). 
These analyses will also address Resource Management Zones (RMZ) and Special 
Management Zones (SMZ) as currently identified in the Resource Management Zones for 
Vancouver Island report (November 1997) and the draft Vancouver Island Summary Land 
Use Plan (1999).  As well, draft Landscape Units (LU) boundaries will be considered in the 
analysis. On these sub-area analyses, only the base case and the historical options will be 
evaluated. 
An information package will be developed summarizing the supporting information for each 
analysis. 
The structure of the process will be to establish a base case and through various sensitivity 
analyses establish the expected impacts of various management scenarios designed to meet 
specified goals. 
15.2 Timber 
15.2.1 Base Case 
The base case will consist of the minimum requirements to meet the legislative requirement 
for forest management.  The operable land base will represent the forest area accessible 
using conventional harvesting techniques. Constraints applied will represent Forest Practices 
Code legal requirements. Pure deciduous stands will be deleted and mixed deciduous-
conifer stands will only contribute their estimated conifer component to the base case. 
Planting will be restricted to S3/S4, S13 and S1CH sites. This option will be taken to 

--- page 85 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 22 
represent the basic requirements of the Tree Farm licence and will be used as a basis for 
assessment of other options. 
15.2.2 Historical Performance 
This case represents the historical performance of the company during the last management 
period. As such, it provides a measure of the current management practices and serves as a 
basis for justification of future management options. 
15.2.3 Other Resources 
Timber supply is impacted by the needs of other non-timber resources. These other 
resources are factored into the analysis in two ways, through removal of areas from the 
operable forest landbase and through incorporation of temporal constraints on the harvest 
levels. The analyses done will incorporate both these features as aspects of the Forest 
Practices Code. The form and nature of these constraints will be examined in sensitivity 
analyses outlined in the following text. 
15.3 Sensitivity Analyses 
15.3.1 Landbase and Operability 
A system of operability classification has been developed for TFL 6 that reflects harvest 
system, timber quality, terrain stability and economics. The landbase has been classified to 
reflect these various qualities. The purpose of the analyses is to quantify the impacts of 
considering the magnitude of the timber supply available under a range of economic 
conditions.  
i. Base case management practices, conventional operable landbase included. 
ii. Base case management practices, conventional and non-conventional areas 
included. 
iii. Base case management practices, conventional, non-conventional and economically 
marginal areas included. 
The economic cycle cannot be predicted with an accuracy to permit rational scheduling of the 
economic viability of these options within a planning horizon of two hundred years. For this 
reason, it will be assumed that the harvest of the various classes of forest will be according 
to an unpredictable periodicity and that tiered quotas will be identified for lands classified as 
above. Harvests from these areas would be charged against the appropriate quota upon 
verification of areas cut in the various categories. Such an approach would allow flexibility in 
response to economic pressures. It is proposed that this analysis will replace the use of 
marginal sites as practiced in the previous Management Plan 8 
15.3.2 Special Management Zones (SMZ) 
Significant area within the TFL has been identified as SMZ. The base case will be run with a 
removal of constraints imposed by the SMZ to identify the impacts of these management 
units. 

--- page 86 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 23 
15.3.3 Volumes 
Estimation of timber volumes is an area of uncertainty.  Inventory confidence levels are 
normally at the 10 % level. Therefore, the volume assumptions for both mature (140 years +) 
and second growth categories will be varied by +/- 10%.   Volumes for mature forest will be 
obtained from the inventory database. Volumes for second growth will be obtained from 
species volume functions that have been calibrated to the second growth resource. The 
basal area numbers collected by J. S. Thrower in a random sample of second growth in the 
TFL will provide an unbiased calibration tool.  The consequences of error introduced by 
volume estimation will be to examine 4 options. 
a. Increase Mature Volume by 10% Second growth as in base case.  
b. Hold mature volume to base case. Increase second growth by 10 % 
c. Decrease mature volume 10%. Second growth as in base case. 
d. Hold mature volume to base case. Decrease second growth by 10% 
Site Productivity - Site productivity will be assigned as site index at 50 years at 1.3m height 
(SI 50). The SI 50 will be assigned on the basis of the ecosystem classification and mapping 
available for the TFL. A study done by J .S. Thrower in 1996 has identified three productivity 
classes for the ecosystems of the TFL and assigned appropriate SI 50 values for each class 
by tree species. Site index variation of +/- 10% will be evaluated for the base case. 
Harvest Age - Rate of volume production of a forest area reaches a maximum when the 
stand volume divided by the age reaches a maximum level (Maximum Mean Annual 
Increment or MMAI). However, this may not represent the most desirable rotation length 
since piece sizes may be too small resulting in higher processing costs. Also, requirements 
for wildlife may involve longer rotations. The effects of rate of return on forest investment, 
however, may create a need for shorter rotations. The effect of rotation length will be 
evaluated by evaluating two options: 
a. Assuming 45cm, 40 cm & 35 cm mean stand crop diameter for Good, Medium and 
Poor sites respectively. 
b. Assuming harvest at MMAI. 
15.3.4 Green-Up and Adjacency 
The green up height will be varied between 1m and 5m to assess the impact of increased 
time to green up. The limits that are used will vary in accordance with the visual classification 
status of the area. On Visually Classified areas, the percentage of area below Visually 
Effective Green-up (VEG) will be varied from lower to upper limits of recommended 
percentage area impacted.  The analyses will be applied only on defined scenic areas as 
they are presently delineated with the understanding that the areas will be subject to change 
in the future.   
15.3.5 Alternative Silviculture 
Alternative silvicultural systems involving partial harvest offer a means of reducing adjacency 
and greenup constraints. Such systems may be applicable on windfirm sites with windfirm 
species. Candidate areas where Douglas-fir and western red cedar exist will have a form of 
retention harvesting applied. Other species such as western hemlock, sitka spruce and 
amabilis fir will only have limited areas available for alternative silviculture because of the 
high risk of windthrow.  It is recognized that data are very limited for attempting such 
analyses and that only very general conclusions will be possible. 

--- page 87 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 24 
 
15.3.6 Deciduous Stands 
The harvest from deciduous stands was raised as an issue in the pre-SMOOP comments. 
Two approaches will be used in addressing this question. Pure deciduous stands were 
excluded from the base case. Stands classed as deciduous-conifer had only the conifer 
volume component included. In the sensitivity analysis, the approaches to be evaluated are:  
a. All pure and mixed deciduous will be included and harvested at a short deciduous 
rotation length of about 50 years (i.e. stands will be managed as conversion 
opportunities). 
b. Alder stands will be logged in conjunction with ongoing development of maturing 
coniferous second growth matrix within which, pure and mixed stands of alder exist. This 
implies longer rotations based on coniferous species. It does not imply conversion 
activities. 
15.3.7 Biodiversity Emphasis 
The effect of the draft bio-diversity options will be evaluated. An initial condition will involve 
all units being classed as LOW. Subsequently, draft BEO’s will be assigned to the 
appropriate areas and the analysis repeated to evaluate the impacts.  
15.3.8 Alternative Harvest Flows 
During the transition from mature forest to managed second growth based forest, a number 
of harvest flow options are available. Two approaches will be assessed: 
a. Even flow from present at long term level. 
b. Declining flow to long term level over different time periods. Rate not to exceed 10 % per 
decade. 
15.3.9 Commercial Thinning 
In the previous Timber Supply Analysis, the option of commercial thinning was examined. In 
TFL 25 Block 4 which was recently incorporated into TFL 6 as Block 2, a thinning component 
was identified. During the past 5 years, operational level programs in Block 2 were carried 
out. The results were not satisfactory, either from a delivered cost point of view or from the 
point of view of forest health. The results suggest that only a very limited number of sites 
may be suitable. As a result, only one analysis will be done which will only include the most 
accessible stands on level topography and well-drained soils. The approach will be to 
remove 30% of the basal area in stands between 40 and 70 years of age on medium or 
better sites. 
15.3.10 Riparian Classification 
Code parameters will be applied to all streams and a basic net-down of area to all streams 
will be generated using linear GIS overlays. S1 and S2 streams can be identified reasonably 
accurately and a buffer applied. However, S3 and S4 are less well known. Model watersheds 
will be used to generate an expected proportion between S3 and S4 and a weighted average 
buffer applied. The sensitivity analysis will involve only the S3 & S4 stream allowances. The 
base case percentage area split between these classes area will be adjusted upward 10% 
and downward 10%   

--- page 88 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 25 
15.3.11 Wildlife Habitat 
Ungulate winter ranges totaling 2040 ha were identified in the last Management Plan. Since 
that time, 1390 ha have been grandfathered as Ungulate Winter Ranges.  These areas have 
been field assessed by wildlife personnel as part of a TFL wide habitat classification project 
(Kremsater, 1999). A number of the grandfathered UWRs were found to be of low value with 
other non-identified areas receiving a higher rating.  It is proposed that the spatial analysis 
recognize the grandfathered UWRs which have moderate or high ungulate ratings, but that 
more suitable habitat be proposed in place of lower value units.  The intent would be that a 
total area equivalent or larger to the existing UWRs be retained for wildlife habitat for 
modeling purposes.  As a sensitivity exercise, the total area will be increased and decreased 
by 10%. It will be assumed that marbled murrelet habitat needs are addressed through 
general Forest Practices Code requirements for biodiversity. No sensitivity will be done.  
Eagle nests have been mapped for the TFL and a standard buffer allowance will be made on 
this basis. No sensitivity will be done. 
15.3.12 Non-recoverable Losses 
A preliminary study has been done to identify losses associated with cut block edges where 
significant height differences exist. Where these edges are not associated with a riparian 
zone or a non-operable area, an allowance per km of edge will be made. This allowance will 
be varied +/- 10 % to evaluate the impact of an error in estimation. 
15.3.13 Silvicultural Opportunities – Fertilization 
Over a decade of research has identified significant productivity gains from fertilizing S1 CH 
ecosystems. This ecosystem occupies between 10 and 25% of the TFL.  Productivity gains 
are based on both trial and operational monitoring data. To date several thousand hectares 
have been treated. The options to be evaluated will be, fertilization of all S1 CH areas 
harvested each year and half of all CH areas harvested each year. Volume gains will be set 
at 80% of trial results and 40% of trial results.  
15.3.14 Pre-commercial thinning (PCT) 
A substantial area of PCT has been carried out on the TFL. It is proposed to evaluate the 
impact of no further PCT, and maintaining the current level of PCT activity. 
15.3.15 Genetic Stock 
Current seed supply from company seed orchards amounts to over 80% of company planting 
needs. The gain to be expected from these orchards is low, averaging 5%. However, future 
planting with Douglas-fir, western hemlock and yellow cypress can be expected to reach 15 
% in about ten years time. Gains with western red cedar and Sitka spruce will likely remain in 
the order of 2 to 3% for the foreseeable future while balsam will remain at zero. 
The base case will assume zero gain for all species. It is proposed that gains for Douglas-fir, 
hemlock and cypress be factored in at 5% for plantations established during the next decade 
and at 15 % for those plantations established after that.  Western red cedar and Sitka spruce 
will remain at 3 % and balsam at zero gains. 
 

--- page 89 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 26 
15.3.16 Planting Level 
Currently, over 90 % of harvested area is planting within 3 years of harvest. It is proposed to 
reduce this percentage to 50 % as a sensitivity evaluation but only on non-S3/S4, S13 and 
S1CH sites. 
The period of regeneration delay is currently estimated to be about 3 years. We propose to 
evaluate 3 year and 5 year regeneration delays to assess the impact of less intensive 
reforestation activity on base case activity where only planting of S3, S13 and S1CH sites is 
considered necessary.  
15.3.17 Unconstrained Option 
This option will run the base case with no constraints beyond operability. 
15.4 Twenty Year Plan 
The purpose of a twenty-year plan is to identify whether a harvest level set in the 
Management Plan is actually achievable on the ground. The existing spatial 5-year plan will 
be identified in the planning database and will provide the starting constraints for the 20-year 
plan. A simulated further 15 years will be generated subject to the constraints imposed by the 
Code and the subsequent spatial distribution of blocks assessed in terms of operational 
feasibility. In this way, the 20-year plan can be incorporated as an inherent component of the 
planning model. 
15.5 Landscape Unit Planning 
There are 6 landscape units within the TFL and 3 partial units that will be analyzed 
independently.  The partial unit analysis will be done independent of other operators.  We will 
observe constraints proportionally.   
The LUP analysis will be run after a preferred option has been identified. This preferred 
option will be used for the LUP analysis 
Because of past harvesting patterns and variation in impacts of constraints among sub-units, 
the sum of the harvest levels on the individual units may not add to the total obtained when 
treating the area as a whole. This difference will be identified if and when it occurs and a 
policy adopted towards dealing with the problem. 

--- page 90 ---
 
TFL 6 – SMOOP  Page 27 
16.0 PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT AND REVIEW STRATEGY  
Public involvement in TFL 6 management has been a standard practice for the past 20 years 
through public review of Management and Working Plans, operational plans and letters to 
the Company or media.  As much of the TFL is Crown land, WFP welcomes public 
involvement in setting management objectives, goals and strategies for TFL 6 management.  
We are committed to addressing issues of public concern and meeting Ministry of Forests 
policies with respect to public involvement. 
WFP maintains a stakeholder register for TFL 6.  This list includes: 
   Resource Agencies 
   Trappers, Guide Outfitters, and other Licenced Resource Users 
   First Nations 
   Local Government and Boards 
   Employees, Labour Unions, Contractors 
   Conservation and Community Groups 
   Members of the General Public 
   Suppliers 
   Forest Licensees 
   Miscellaneous Forest Users  
16.1 Pre SMOOP Public Review 
In August 1998 letters were sent to the TFL 6 stakeholder list (over 242 individuals, 
organizations and agencies) requesting comments on the existing Management Plan and 
announcing the commencement of preparation of the SMOOP.  Advertising also appeared in 
the North Island Gazette requesting public input. 
No responses were received as a result of the initial stakeholder letter and one response 
dealing with road deactivation was received from the public advertising.  The public comment 
was used to prepare the SMOOP drafts. 
16.2 Draft SMOOP Public Review 
In accordance with the revised Communications Plan for MP 9 the draft SMOOP was sent to 
all TFL 6 stakeholders for review and input.  As well, advertising announcing the completion 
of the draft SMOOP and its availability for review at Ministry of Forests and Company 
Operations offices was inserted in the North Island Gazette.  In addition, the draft SMOOP 
was made available on the WFP website and 50 downloads recorded. 
The letter accompanying the draft SMOOP included a commitment that Company staff will be 
available to make individual presentations to any person or group requesting such a meeting.  
Only one individual did so.  All input received as part of the draft SMOOP review period was  
summarized and considered in the revision of the draft SMOOP.   
16.3 Review of Draft Management Plan 
Refer to Appendix in the TFL 6 – Draft Management Plan. 

--- page 91 ---
 
 
Appendix XXIV 
Statement of Objectives for Employment and 
Economic Opportunity

--- page 92 ---
 
TFL 6 – OSEEO  Page 1 
Objectives and Strategies for Employment and 
Economic Opportunities (OSEEO) 
1.0 Objectives 
Western Forest Products Limited is committed to maintaining and wherever possible 
enhancing employment opportunities and economic development.   To do so is of benefit to 
WFP as well as everyone who has an interest in seeing our operations succeed.  These 
stakeholders include communities, our employees, the contracting industry, First Nations, 
shareholders, suppliers, our customers and the Crown.  In order to maintain and enhance 
employment and economic opportunities it will be necessary to ensure that our operations 
are economically viable, environmentally appropriate and socially acceptable.   
2.0 Strategies 
To date Western Forest Products strategies to enhance employment and economic 
opportunities has focused on the following opportunities: 
Strategic Acquisitions 
In December 1997, Doman Industries purchased the Crown Operations of Pacific Forest 
Products Limited.  This acquisition, renamed Doman-Western Lumber Ltd., provided new 
assets that complemented existing tenures and conversion facilities.  The purchase 
established Western Forest Products as the second largest licensee on the BC coast.       
Maintenance of Access to Fibre Supplies 
WFP tenures do not supply sufficient fibre to support all of the Doman and Western Pulp 
mills.  As a result WFP has to purchase or trade for a significant volume on the Vancouver 
log market each year.  In 1999 we purchased 1.5 million m3 of logs and 222,000 BDU of 
chips.   
The Doman-Western acquisition significantly expanded the company’s tenures and fibre 
supply from 2.5 million cubic meters to 4.2 million cubic meters.  While this lessened our 
dependency on external fibre supplies we still have to purchase or trade for significant 
volume.  
Pursuit of Production Efficiencies and Economies of Scale 
The acquisition of Doman-Western significantly expanded our lumber business and 
enhanced our position as a major coastal producer of premium wood products.  The 
increased size, marketing resources, production capacity, purchasing leverage and product 
offerings will create many opportunities for synergies that should result in lower costs through 
production efficiencies and economies of scale.   
Achieving production efficiencies will be vital to our success as several portions of our 
business are in commodity items where competition revolves around price. Through optimal 
log allocations and utilization, WFP intends to improve product values and enhance lumber 
recoveries.   

--- page 93 ---
 
TFL 6 – OSEEO  Page 2 
Development of Niche Markets 
Western Forest Products is involved in niche markets for dissolving chemical pulp and 
western red cedar. 
The Port Alice dissolving sulphite pulp mill is one of only two such mills in Canada and the 
only one in British Columbia.  The mill is currently being upgraded to further specialize its 
production into higher value-added grades of dissolving sulphite pulp.   
Approximately one-quarter of WFPs forest inventory is made up of western red cedar.  The 
purchase of Pacific Forest Products increased the supply of cedar logs available to Doman 
mills as PFP had formerly sold or traded away cedar volumes.  WFP mills now produce 20% 
of the coastal supply of this specialty product.  Red cedar continues to be in demand and will 
be a marketing focus for WFP.   
Administrative Efficiencies 
WFP operations are constantly looking for opportunities to introduce administrative 
efficiencies.  In 1998 many operational functions, formerly centralized at WFP’s corporate 
office in Vancouver were moved to three Regional offices.   
Other administrative efficiencies were obtained through a consolidation of various Tree Farm 
Licences.  As part of this consolidation, WFP Tree Farm Licences in the Port McNeill Forest 
District were consolidated into a single licence (TFL 6).  This consolidation did not change 
WFP’s harvest volume within the Port McNeill Forest Distirct.  However, it increased the TFL 
6 annual allowable cut available to WFP for administrative purposes from a pre-
amalgamation total of 1 187 380 m3 to a post amalgamation total of 1 464 264 m3.  
Certification of WFP Woodlands 
Today’s buyers and customers want assurances that forest products are produced from 
sustainable, well managed forests.  WFP sees independent certification of our woodlands as 
the key to providing that assurance.  In 1998 WFP became the first BC company to apply for 
certification through the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC).  To compliment the FSC 
certification we are also pursuing ISO 14001 registration of the company’s forest 
management systems and certification under the Canadian Standards Association (CSA) 
Sustainable Forest Management system.   
Future Plans 
The present state of the economy has placed restraints on strategic plans.  There are no 
plans to permanently shut down any of the Company’s manufacturing plants.  Assuming that 
an adequate supply of fibre is available at reasonable cost, it is planned to return to 
production rates in place prior to the current economic downturn.  Plants will be upgraded as 
required to ensure that they maintain efficient production.   
Plans to expand the production of value added products have been put on hold. The projects 
on hold include the value-added plant proposed for Tahsis and the second stage of the 
Chemainus value added plant.  Both of these projects which could create up to 24 new jobs 
at Tahsis and 40 at Chemainus will be re-evaluated once the economy rebounds.  

--- page 94 ---
 
TFL 6 – OSEEO  Page 3 
The $24 million upgrade of Western Pulp’s Port Alice mill which began in 1998 was 
completed in 1999.   The mill improvements should allow the production of higher value 
products at reduced cost.   
3.0 Manufacturing TFL 6 Volume 
The Doman Industries Limited group of companies include Western Forest Products and 
Western Pulp as wholly owned subsidiaries.  In 1998 Doman Industries curtailed both 
harvest and manufacturing operations by approximately 40% in response to the collapse of 
Pacific Rim markets and constraints place on BC manufacturers by the Softwood agreement. 
Doman Industries operates nine sawmills located in Ladysmith, Nanaimo, Tahsis, 
Vancouver, Cowichan Bay and Chemainus.  These mills can run two shifts per day and 
process 17,100 m3 of logs which equates to 4.1 million m3 annually.   
Each of the sawmills use computer controlled equipment to optimize the lumber recover from 
each log.  The Company’s high quality timber supply and particular design of the sawmills 
enable it to efficiently produce speciality products such as upper grade lumber, lumber with 
long lengths (over 20 feet) and lumber with wide widths (over 10 inches).  These mills 
produce approximately 1 billion board feet of lumber in a normal market year.  In 1999 
approximately 928,000 m3 of TFL 6 sawlogs were directed to these mills. 
Doman Industries also operates a log-merchandizer at Duke Point.  This mill runs two shifts 
in a normal year and uses 1,300 m3 per day of low grade logs.  The merchandizer extracts 
lumber from pulp grade logs and processes the balance into wood chips.  This mill produces 
approximately 84 million board feet of lumber per year and 186,000 BDU of chips.  These 
chips are shipped to Western Pulp’s Squamish mill.  Most of the TFL 6 pulp log supply goes 
directly to the Port Alice mill so little TFL 6 fibre passes through the merchandizer.   
Western Pulp operates two pulp mills on the BC coast.  When operating at capacity the 
dissolving pulp mill near Port Alice requires 468,000 BDUs of chips (936,000 m3 of logs) 
annually.  The NBSK pulp mill near Squamish uses 740,000 BDUs of pulp chips (1,480,000 
m3) of logs annually.  In 1999 TFL 6 produced 263,000 m3 of pulp logs for Port Alice and 
sawmills utilizing TFL 6 logs sent approximately 82,000 BDUs of chips to Squamish. 
A value added manufacturing plant at Chemainus operates a single shift per day.  This 
processing centre has an annual production and drying capacity of 60-80 million board feet 
of lumber.  The plant remanufactures lower grade lumber received from Doman’s Ladysmith, 
Nanaimo, Tahsis, Duke Point and Vancouver divisions.  It also dries, cuts, resaws and trims 
other lumber into various grades and dimensions.  This lumber is primarily used in the 
manufacturing of moulding, panelling, and door and window frames.   An additional 100 
million board feet of lumber are sold each year to remanufacturing operations. 
In 1999 88% of the TFL 6 log volume went directly to Western Pulp or Doman Industries 
mills.  The balance was traded for species and grades more suited to our mills.  A proportion 
of the volume was also made available to local operators on the North Island.  
Log flow varies with the market demand for certain species and grades.  In 1998 for 
example, the collapse of the Asian market required diverting log flows to mills better suited to 
produce for the North American and European markets.  The OSEEO information is a 
snapshot in time of TFL 6 woodflow. 

--- page 95 ---
 
TFL 6 – OSEEO  Page 4 
Table 1 summarizes the processing of TFL 6 volume in 1999.  
Table 1  Processing of 1999 TFL 6 Volume 
 
Facility Consumption 
(000 m3) 
TFL 6 
Volume 
(000 m3) 
Chip 
Production 
(000 BDU) 
Proportion 
Mill 
Consumption 
Nanaimo 
Duke Point 
Sawmill  
294 460* 44 100% 
Ladysmith 
Sawmill 
Division 
353 237 0 67% 
Cowichan 
Sawmill 
Division 
248 33 0 13% 
Vancouver 
Silvertree 
Sawmill 
293 143 22 49% 
Tahsis 
Sawmill 
Division 
328 50 8 15% 
Nanaimo 
Sawmill  
Division 
478 5 1 1% 
Nanaimo 
Duke Point 
Log 
Merchandizer  
774 16 7 2% 
Port Alice 
Specialty 
Pulp Mill  
568 263 0 46% 
Trades  169   
TOTAL 
(000m3)  916 82**  
* 183,000 m3 of logs were in inventory at the end of 1999 
** 82,000 BDU equated to 11.2% of Squamish pulp mill fibre needs in 1999.   
 
4.0 Employment Associated with TFL 6 
4.1 Direct Employment 
It is estimated that the post-amalgamation TFL 6 volume will support 1,246 direct harvesting 
and manufacturing jobs.  These are primary jobs associated with forest management or 
manufacturing and based at a forest operation, dryland sort, processing plant or 
administrative office.  The only exception is employment associated with log towing or 
barging.   

--- page 96 ---
 
TFL 6 – OSEEO  Page 5 
The data collected for the OSEEO includes Western Forest Products Limited employment, 
contract logging and silviculture employment, a proportionate number of Doman Industry 
positions and a proportionate number of Western Pulp positions dependant on TFL 6 
volume. 
In 1999 88% of the TFL 6 volume was processed by Doman or Western Pulp mills so no 
manufacturing labour was associated with 12% of the produced volume. The manufacturing 
employment figures have been adjusted upwards in the OSEEO to account for this.   
Table 2 presents direct employment associated with TFL 6 volume.   
Table 2  Direct Employment by Category and Location 
Category Location FTE FTE Subtotal 
Administration Port McNeill 7  
 Duncan 23  
 Vancouver 26 56 
Silviculture Holberg 50  
 Jeune Landing 29  
 Port McNeill 52 131 
Road Construction Holberg 34  
 Jeune Landing 11  
 Port McNeill 15 60 
Harvesting Holberg 88  
 Jeune Landing/QDLS 135  
 Port McNeill 87 309 
Inventory & Planning Vancouver 4  
 North Island 2 6 
Log Transportation Vancouver 27 27 
Timber Processing Cowichan 31  
 Ladysmith 30  
 Nanaimo 87  
 Port Alice 167  
 Vancouver 87  
 Squamish 41  
 TFL 25(4) Additive 97  
 Trade Additive 117 657 
Total Direct Employment   1246 
Both local and distant communities benefit from this direct employment.  As would be 
expected, the majority of the direct harvest and forest management employment is in 
communities near TFL 6.  However, manufacturing employment is split relatively equally 
between the North Island, the balance of Vancouver Island and the Lower Mainland.  Table 3 
provides a breakdown of direct employment based on employee residence.   As the two 
manufacturing employment additives are not tied to specific employees they are not applied 
to a specific region.
 

--- page 97 ---
 
TFL 6 – OSEEO  Page 6 
Table 3  Direct Employment Summary by Community and Region 
Based on Residence 
 
Category Location FTE Total  
FTE 
North Island Alert Bay 1 580 
Coal Harbour 22  
Holberg 38  
Port Alice 233  
Port Hardy 119  
Port McNeill 162  
Quatsino 3  
Winter Harbour 1  
Central and South Island Black Creek 1 206 
Campbell River 5  
Comox 4  
Courtenay 10  
Cowichan 31  
Duncan 25  
Fanny Bay 1  
Ladysmith 32  
Monte Creek 1  
Nanaimo 86  
Parksville 1  
Port Alberni 6  
Qualicum 2  
Victoria 1  
Mainland Abbotsford 2 227 
Burnaby 2  
Delta 2  
North Van 7  
Richmond 2  
Sechelt 1  
Squamish 50  
Surrey 11  
Vancouver 145  
Whistler 5  
Manufacturing Additives 
Unknown Origin 
233 
Total Direct Employment 1246 
4.2 Indirect Employment 
The direct employment described in section 4.1 induces further indirect employment.  It is 
generally agreed that each direct Forest Industry job supports two indirect positions.  The 1 
246 direct jobs described for TFL 6 will induce an additional 2 492 jobs in the economy for a 
total employment figure of 3 738. 

--- page 98 ---
 
TFL 6 – OSEEO  Page 7 
4.3 First Nations 
The majority of the area of TFL 6 lies within the traditional territories of three First Nations.  
The Quatsino First Nation’s traditional territory includes Block 1 and the portion of Block 2 
that flows into Quatsino Sound.  The Kwakiutl First Nation’s traditional territory includes the 
portion of Block 2 which drains into Queen Charlotte    Strait.  The Tlatlasikwala First Nation’s 
traditional territory includes the portion of Block 1 that drains into the San Josef watershed.  
Western Forest Products recognizes the importance of close ties with First Nations 
communities and appreciates that First Nations people want a greater share of the economic 
benefits accruing from resource development.    
Western Forest Products is committed to: 
• Strengthening relationships with First Nations. 
• Ensuring aboriginal rights are protected. 
• Developing an ongoing business relationship with Band Councils. 
• Entering into arrangements with Band Councils for job training and capacity building. 
• Providing permanent employment opportunities for First Nations members. 
To this end Western Forest Products will continue to support existing initiatives such as the 
Quatsino Forestry Company harvest agreement, silviculture initiatives involving both 
Quatsino and Kwakiutl Band members and capacity building initiatives. 
While WFP does not record our employees racial background, we believe we have 
approximately 25 First Nations members employed in forest management within TFL 6.   